<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta charset="utf-8" />
  <meta name="generator" content="pandoc" />
  <title>ch003.xhtml</title>
  <style>
  </style>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../styles/stylesheet1.css" />
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<div class="page copyright-page">
<p>© 2026 George Alexander Vela</p>
<p>All rights reserved.</p>
<p>No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval<br />
system, or transmitted in any form or by any means without the prior<br />
written permission of the author.</p>
<p>First edition, 2026</p>
<p>Printed in the United States of America</p>
</div>
<div class="page epigraph-page">
<p>“But when he too was hated by all the gods, then verily he wandered alone over the Aleian plain, consuming his own soul, and avoiding the paths of men.”</p>
<p>— Homer, <em>Iliad</em> VI.200–202</p>
</div>
<div class="chapter">
<div class="chapter-header">
<span class="chapter-label">— Chapter One —</span>
<section id="the-prince-of-corinth" class="level2 chapter-title">
<h2 class="chapter-title">The Prince of Corinth</h2>
</section>
</div>
<p>There are cities that sit upon the earth like old men resting on a bench, content to watch the world go past; and then there are cities that grip the land with both hands, as though terrified it might be taken from them at any moment. Corinth was the latter sort. Wedged between two seas on a narrow isthmus of rock and scrub pine, the city clung to its position with the tenacity of a barnacle and the ambition of an emperor. To the east lay the Saronic Gulf, blue and glittering, leading to Athens and the islands; to the west stretched the Gulf of Corinth, grey-green and restless, opening onto the wilder waters beyond. Between these two bodies of water, Corinth had planted itself like a toll-keeper at the only gate, and it extracted its price from every ship, every merchant, every amphora of oil and bale of dyed cloth that passed between the Peloponnese and the rest of Greece. It was a city of extraordinary wealth, and it wanted you to know it.</p>
<p>The streets were paved with fitted stone, not the rutted dirt tracks of lesser towns, and the houses of the wealthy rose two and even three stories, their whitewashed walls decorated with painted friezes in terracotta and black. The agora was vast, loud, and perpetually crowded, a great open square where fishmongers shouted over potters, where Phoenician traders in striped robes haggled with sunburned Corinthian sailors, where the smell of roasting meat competed with the stench of the tanneries and both lost, ultimately, to the omnipresent salt-and-pine perfume of the sea. Temples studded the lower slopes of the Acrocorinth, that massive flat-topped mountain that loomed over the city like a disapproving parent, and at its summit, so high that clouds sometimes wrapped it like a shawl, stood the temple of Aphrodite, where the goddess of love was worshipped with a devotion that was, depending on one’s perspective, either deeply spiritual or extremely profitable.</p>
<p>It was, in short, a city that understood the value of things. And it was here, in the royal palace that sprawled along the northern slope of the Acrocorinth, that a boy named Hipponous grew up learning, without anyone explicitly teaching him, that everything in the world had a price, and that the trick was never to pay it.</p>
<p>This was perhaps inevitable, given his family.</p>
<p>His grandfather was Sisyphus, and if that name does not immediately conjure a specific image in the reader’s mind, it should. Sisyphus, King of Corinth, was the cleverest man who had ever lived, and he had made absolutely certain that everyone knew it. He had outwitted Autolycus, the greatest thief in Greece. He had tricked the god of death himself, chaining Thanatos in his own fetters and thereby preventing anyone in the entire world from dying for a period that, while brief, had been extremely unsettling. When he finally did die (the gods, as a collective, having decided that enough was quite enough), he had persuaded his wife to leave his body unburied, then convinced Persephone, queen of the underworld, to let him return to the surface to scold his wife for the oversight. He had, of course, no intention of returning to the underworld once released, and it had taken Hermes himself, the god of travelers and tricksters and the one deity who could genuinely appreciate Sisyphus’s nerve even while finding it insufferable, to drag him back to the land of the dead.</p>
<p>His punishment was legendary. An enormous boulder. A steep hill. Push the boulder up. Watch it roll back down. Push it up again. Forever. It was the sort of punishment that the gods designed not merely to cause suffering but to make a philosophical point, though the precise nature of the point depended rather heavily on whom you asked. Some said it was a punishment for hubris. Others said it was for the crime of believing that cleverness could substitute for wisdom. Sisyphus himself, had anyone bothered to ask him (and no one did, because visiting the underworld for a chat was considered poor form), might have said that the real crime was getting caught.</p>
<p>This was the blood that ran in young Hipponous’s veins: the blood of a man who had cheated death and been made to pay for it in an eternity of futile labor. It was not, perhaps, the most auspicious inheritance.</p>
<p>His father was Glaucus, son of Sisyphus, who had inherited his father’s cleverness but applied it primarily to horses. Glaucus bred the finest horses in the Peloponnese, and he kept them on a diet that was, by all accounts, deeply unnatural. Some said he fed them human flesh to make them fierce. Whether this was true or simply the sort of rumor that attached itself to the family of Sisyphus like burrs to a wool cloak, the horses were undeniably magnificent and undeniably terrifying, creatures of rolling eyes and foam-flecked mouths that would as soon bite a groom’s hand off as accept a sugar-date from it. Glaucus loved these animals with a passion that he did not extend to his sons, which was unfortunate, because he had two of them and both, in their different ways, desperately wanted his attention.</p>
<p>Though some whispered, in corners and behind cupped hands, that Glaucus was not truly the father of both boys. Some said that Poseidon, the earth-shaker, the god of the sea and of horses, had visited the queen’s chambers one night in the form of a wave that rolled through the window, or a stallion that became a man, or simply as himself, which was terrifying enough. The queen never confirmed or denied this, and Glaucus never asked. In Corinth, it was considered unwise to ask questions whose answers might require you to challenge a god.</p>
<p>The two boys grew up together in the palace, as close as two brothers can be when one of them is everything the other is not.</p>
<div class="section-break">
✦   ✦   ✦
</div>
<p>Deliades was the elder by two years, and he was, by every measure that Corinth valued, perfect. He was golden. This is not merely a poetic description but a literal one: his hair was the color of ripe wheat, his skin bronzed by the sun to the shade of good Corinthian pottery, his eyes a warm, honeyed brown that made women (and not a few men) feel as though they were being gently bathed in something expensive. He was tall, broad-shouldered, easy in his body in the way that only people who have never doubted their right to exist can be. He laughed often and loudly. He was good at sports, good at conversation, good at the hundred small political performances that constituted life in a royal court. He could charm a merchant into halving his price, a priest into extending a blessing, a girl into extending her curfew. People loved Deliades, and Deliades, with the generous magnanimity of someone who has never lacked for love, loved them back.</p>
<p>Hipponous was none of these things.</p>
<p>He was darker, for a start. Where Deliades was golden, Hipponous was shadow: dark hair, dark eyes, skin that tanned to something closer to olive than bronze. He was lean where Deliades was broad, quick where Deliades was strong, watchful where Deliades was open. He had a face that was handsome in the way a knife is handsome, all angles and edges, the kind of face that made people think “clever” before they thought “kind.” He moved through rooms like a cat through long grass, and he had a habit of appearing in places where he had not previously been noticed, which unnerved the servants and occasionally his father.</p>
<p>He was, by almost any measure, more gifted than his brother. He could ride better (much better; the horses, even Glaucus’s savage, meat-fed monsters, seemed to calm under his hands, as though they recognized something in him that they respected or feared). He could fight better, having a quickness of reflex and a tactical mind that Deliades, for all his strength, could not match. He could think better, though this was the sort of gift that, in a boy of twelve or fourteen, manifested less as wisdom and more as a devastating talent for saying exactly the wrong thing at exactly the wrong time.</p>
<p>“You’re too clever for your own good,” his mother told him once, when he had reduced a visiting dignitary to stammering fury by pointing out, politely and accurately, a logical flaw in the man’s argument about trade tariffs. “Your grandfather was too clever for his own good, and look where it got him.”</p>
<p>“It got him remembered,” Hipponous had replied, which was true but unhelpful.</p>
<p>The thing about Deliades and Hipponous (and this was the thing that everyone saw but no one said, because to say it would be to acknowledge something uncomfortable about the nature of love and favoritism and the way parents divide their affection, not always equally, between their children) was that they were two halves of something that, combined, would have been extraordinary. Deliades had the warmth; Hipponous had the fire. Deliades had the charm; Hipponous had the depth. Deliades could walk into a room and make everyone in it happy; Hipponous could walk into a room and make everyone in it think. Together, they might have been the greatest king Corinth had ever known. Apart, each was incomplete in ways that neither could entirely articulate but both, in their quieter moments, could feel.</p>
<p>They loved each other. This needs to be said plainly, because what comes later might make it easy to forget. They loved each other the way brothers do, which is to say, fiercely, competitively, and with a constant low-grade irritation that could flare into genuine anger at the smallest provocation but which was, at its foundation, an expression of something that neither boy would have been caught dead calling tenderness. They wrestled in the courtyard until the paving stones were smeared with dust and blood. They raced each other on horseback along the cliffs above the Saronic Gulf, so close to the edge that the servants who saw them had to look away. They argued about everything: which god was most powerful, which hero most admirable, whether the Phoenician alphabet was superior to the Greek, and whether octopus was better grilled or stewed (Deliades said grilled; Hipponous said stewed; neither would concede, and the argument continued, at irregular intervals, for approximately six years).</p>
<p>But beneath the love, and intertwined with it so thoroughly that neither could be extracted without destroying both, there was something else. It was not hatred, exactly. It was more the awareness, growing sharper and more painful with each passing year, that the world had room for only one of them.</p>
<p>Corinth needed an heir. Glaucus was getting older, his obsession with his horses growing more intense and more peculiar as the years passed, and the question of succession, which had once been comfortably distant, was becoming uncomfortably present. And everyone knew, without its being formally announced, that the heir would be Deliades. He was older. He was more popular. He was, to put it bluntly, easier. Hipponous was brilliant, yes, but he was also difficult, and courts prefer easy brilliance to difficult brilliance, just as dinner guests prefer wine that goes down smoothly to wine that is technically superior but leaves a burning sensation in the throat.</p>
<p>Hipponous knew this. He knew it the way you know the weather is changing: not because anyone tells you, but because you can feel it in the air, in the way conversations shift when you enter a room, in the way your father’s eyes slide past you to rest on your brother, in the way the court tutor spends an extra hour with Deliades on rhetoric and statecraft while you are sent to practice javelin throws in the courtyard. He knew it, and he told himself he didn’t care, and he almost believed it, in the way that people almost believe things they desperately need to be true.</p>
<div class="section-break">
✦   ✦   ✦
</div>
<p>There was a day, late in the autumn of Hipponous’s sixteenth year, that he would remember for the rest of his life, though at the time it seemed like nothing more than an ordinary afternoon.</p>
<p>He was sitting on the low wall that bordered the palace’s western terrace, looking out over the Gulf of Corinth. The sun was setting, which it did with spectacular extravagance in Corinth, painting the sky in shades of orange and purple and a deep, bruised red that looked like the inside of a wound. Below him, the city cascaded down the slope in a tumble of white walls and terra-cotta roofs, and beyond it the harbor was busy with the last commerce of the day, small boats threading between larger vessels like mice between the feet of cattle. The air smelled of salt, and wood smoke, and the faint sweetness of the grapes that were being pressed in the vineyards on the lower slopes.</p>
<p>Deliades came and sat beside him. He smelled of the gymnasium, of sweat and olive oil and the particular dusty warmth of a body that has been exercising in the sun. He was eighteen, fully a man now by Corinthian reckoning, and he wore his adulthood with the same easy grace that he wore everything else. He had their father’s jaw and their mother’s eyes and a smile that seemed to cost him nothing, which was perhaps its most infuriating quality.</p>
<p>“You’re brooding,” Deliades said. It was not a question.</p>
<p>“I’m thinking.”</p>
<p>“Same thing, with you.” Deliades stretched his legs out, crossing his ankles, and leaned back on his hands. “What are you thinking about?”</p>
<p>“Nothing.”</p>
<p>“You’re a terrible liar, Hipponous. It’s your one great failing.”</p>
<p>This was not true; Hipponous was, when he chose to be, an excellent liar, a skill he had inherited directly from his grandfather. But he did not lie well to Deliades, because Deliades knew his face the way a sailor knows the sea, and could read its moods with the same instinctive accuracy.</p>
<p>“I was thinking about Grandfather,” Hipponous said, which was partially true.</p>
<p>Deliades made a sound that was not quite a laugh. “Cheerful subject.”</p>
<p>“Do you ever wonder if it’s in us? The thing that was in him?”</p>
<p>“What thing?”</p>
<p>“The… the too-muchness. The thing that made him think he could outwit death. Not just the cleverness, but the belief that the rules don’t apply.”</p>
<p>Deliades considered this. He was not, despite what people assumed, stupid; he simply preferred not to think about things that were likely to make him unhappy, which was, depending on your perspective, either wisdom or cowardice. “Maybe,” he said. “But I think the rules are different for us than they were for him. We’re not trying to cheat death. We’re just trying to live.”</p>
<p>“Is there a difference?”</p>
<p>Deliades looked at him sideways, the way you look at someone who has said something that might be profound or might be ridiculous and you haven’t yet decided which. “Yes,” he said firmly. “There is. Grandfather wanted to be immortal. I just want to be happy.”</p>
<p>“And what do you think I want?”</p>
<p>Deliades was quiet for a moment. The sun had sunk lower, and the light had turned from gold to copper, catching the edges of his hair and making him look, for a moment, genuinely divine, as though the rumor about Poseidon might have attached itself to the wrong brother. “I think you want to be extraordinary,” he said softly. “And I think you already are, and I think the problem is that you don’t believe it unless someone else confirms it, and the person you most want confirmation from is the one person who will never give it.”</p>
<p>He meant their father. They both knew he meant their father.</p>
<p>Hipponous felt something twist in his chest, the way a rope twists when you wind it too tight, and he wanted to say something sharp and defensive, something that would push Deliades away and restore the comfortable distance between them, because intimacy was dangerous and kindness, particularly perceptive kindness, was the most dangerous thing of all. But instead he said nothing, and Deliades, with the emotional intelligence that was his greatest and most undervalued gift, said nothing either, and they sat together in the dying light and watched the sun sink into the western sea.</p>
<p>It was, in retrospect, one of the last truly peaceful moments of Hipponous’s life, though he did not know it then. He did not know that within the year, this brother sitting beside him, this golden, easy, maddeningly lovable brother, would be dead. He did not know that the death would be by his own hand. He did not know that he would carry the weight of it for the rest of his life, like a boulder that could never quite reach the top of the hill.</p>
<p>But then, the children of Sisyphus never did know when to stop pushing.</p>
<div class="section-break">
✦   ✦   ✦
</div>
<p>The city of Corinth in those days was governed less by formal law than by a complex web of obligation, custom, and what might charitably be called mutual understanding and less charitably called mutual blackmail. The noble families intermarried, feuded, reconciled, and feuded again with the regularity of the tides, and the royal house of Sisyphus sat at the center of this web like a spider that had grown so fat on its catches that it could barely move but still commanded, by virtue of its position and its reputation, the deference of every other creature in the web.</p>
<p>Glaucus ruled, but he ruled the way a man steers a ship in a strong current: with the constant awareness that the current was more powerful than he was and that his steering was, at best, a negotiation. The merchant families controlled the harbor and the trade routes. The priesthoods controlled the temples and, through them, the festivals and the calendar and the superstitious hearts of the common people. The military aristocracy controlled the walls and the soldiers. Glaucus controlled, in theory, all of these groups, but in practice he controlled his horses and his dinner table and not much else, and everyone understood this arrangement and found it satisfactory, because a weak king who did not interfere was, in the collective judgment of the Corinthian elite, vastly preferable to a strong king who might.</p>
<p>Into this carefully balanced ecosystem, Hipponous moved like a stone dropped into still water, sending ripples in every direction. He could not help it. He had his grandfather’s mind and his (possible) divine father’s intensity, and the combination was, in a court that valued smooth surfaces and unspoken agreements, deeply disruptive. He asked questions that were not meant to be asked. He noticed things that were not meant to be noticed. He pointed out, with a precision that was either admirable or infuriating, the gaps between what people said and what people did, and he could not seem to understand why this made people uncomfortable.</p>
<p>“The harbor master is stealing,” he told his father one evening at dinner, as casually as though he were commenting on the quality of the wine.</p>
<p>Glaucus looked up from his plate. He had the expression of a man who has been told that the roof is leaking and is trying to decide whether it would be less trouble to fix the roof or simply move to a different room. “I know,” he said.</p>
<p>“You know?”</p>
<p>“Of course I know. Everyone knows. He steals a certain amount, and in exchange, he keeps the harbor running smoothly. If I replaced him, his successor would also steal, but it would take the new man a year to learn how to run the harbor, and in that year, we would lose more in trade disruption than we would gain in reduced theft. It is an arrangement.”</p>
<p>“It is corruption.”</p>
<p>“It is Corinth,” Glaucus said, in the tone of a man ending a conversation, and returned to his dinner.</p>
<p>Deliades, sitting across the table, caught Hipponous’s eye and gave a tiny shake of his head, a gesture so small that no one else would have noticed it but which communicated, with the efficiency of long practice, the message: “Let it go. You are right, but being right is not the same as being wise, and this is a distinction that you really must learn to make if you intend to survive in this family.”</p>
<p>Hipponous let it go. But he did not forget, because forgetting was not something he was good at. His mind was a palace of many rooms, and every slight, every injustice, every moment of being overlooked or undervalued or dismissed was stored in its own room, carefully preserved, like specimens in a naturalist’s collection. He did not revisit these rooms out of bitterness (or so he told himself; the difference between preserving a grievance and nursing one is largely a matter of self-awareness, and self-awareness, despite being the foundation of all wisdom, is the quality that clever people most frequently lack). He revisited them because they were data, and data was how you understood the world, and understanding the world was how you survived in it.</p>
<p>Grandfather Sisyphus had understood the world better than anyone. He had simply made the mistake of believing that understanding was the same as mastery.</p>
<div class="section-break">
✦   ✦   ✦
</div>
<p>There were things about Hipponous that only Deliades knew, and things about Deliades that only Hipponous knew, and these secret knowledges were the invisible threads that bound them together more tightly than blood or custom or the shared experience of growing up in a palace that was beautiful and cold and full of people who smiled without warmth.</p>
<p>Hipponous knew that Deliades was afraid of the dark. Not in the way that children are afraid of the dark, which is the fear of imagined monsters, but in the way that thoughtful adults are afraid of the dark, which is the fear of what the darkness reveals about the mind when there is nothing else to look at. Deliades, for all his golden ease, had a horror of being alone with his own thoughts, and he filled his life with noise and company and activity the way a man fills sandbags to hold back a flood, with desperate efficiency and the constant awareness that the water level was rising.</p>
<p>Deliades knew that Hipponous dreamed of horses. Not ordinary horses, but a specific horse, a creature that appeared in his sleep with the regularity of the moon and the intensity of fever. It was white (not grey, which is what most people mean when they say a horse is white, but truly, impossibly white, the color of cloud, of sea-foam, of the first moment of lightning before the sound catches up). It had wings. Not the stiff, feathered wings of a bird, which would have looked absurd on a horse and which Hipponous, even in dreams, would have found aesthetically offensive, but something else entirely, something that was more like solidified wind, or visible music, or the physical manifestation of the concept of freedom. The horse ran through his dreams on hooves that did not touch the ground, and sometimes, in the dream, it turned its great head and looked at him with eyes that were the color of the sky at the highest point of noon, and in those eyes there was a recognition, as though the horse had been looking for him for a very long time and had finally, with a patience that was itself a kind of divinity, found him.</p>
<p>He told Deliades about the dream once, sitting on the rocks above the harbor while the fishing boats came in at dusk. He expected his brother to laugh, or to make a joke about their father’s horses, or to change the subject with the smooth deflection that was Deliades’s default response to anything that threatened to become serious. But Deliades did none of these things. He listened, and when Hipponous finished, he was quiet for a long time, and then he said: “Maybe it’s your destiny.”</p>
<p>“A horse?”</p>
<p>“Not just a horse. A winged horse. Something that can carry you away from here.” He paused. “Away from all of this.”</p>
<p>There was something in his voice that Hipponous had never heard before, or rather, had heard but never acknowledged: a sadness, a gentleness, a recognition that the world was going to separate them and that there was nothing either of them could do about it. Deliades would be king. Hipponous would be… something else. And the distance between king and something else was not measured in miles but in identity, in the slow, painful process of becoming a person that no one had planned for you to be.</p>
<p>“I don’t want to leave,” Hipponous said, and was surprised to discover that it was true.</p>
<p>“I know,” Deliades said. “But you will. People like you always do.”</p>
<p>“People like me?”</p>
<p>“People who are too big for the room they’re standing in.”</p>
<p>It was the kindest thing anyone had ever said to him, and Hipponous, who did not know how to receive kindness without suspecting it of ulterior motives (this was another gift from Grandfather Sisyphus, along with the cleverness and the dark eyes and the bone-deep conviction that everyone, ultimately, was playing a game), felt something crack inside him, some wall that he had been building since childhood without realizing he was building it, and for a moment, just a moment, he was simply a boy sitting with his brother, and the world was simple, and love was not complicated, and the future was not a sentence that had already been written in a language he couldn’t read.</p>
<p>The moment passed. They do.</p>
<p>Below them, the fishing boats were coming in. The nets were full of silver, and the fishermen were singing, and the gulls were screaming, and Corinth was doing what Corinth always did: making money, making deals, making the best of its position between two seas and pretending, with the cheerful dishonesty that was the city’s founding virtue, that it had earned its good fortune rather than merely inherited it.</p>
<div class="section-break">
✦   ✦   ✦
</div>
<p>The seasons turned, as seasons do, with the indifference of all natural processes to human drama. Summer became autumn; autumn became winter, the short, wet, grey winter of the Peloponnese, when the seas grew rough and the ships stayed in harbor and the city turned inward, living on its stored wealth like a bear living on its fat. Winter became spring, and spring brought the sailing season, and with it the return of trade, and gossip, and news from the wider world.</p>
<p>Hipponous turned seventeen. Deliades turned nineteen. Their father, Glaucus, grew stranger, spending more and more time with his horses, feeding them things that the grooms whispered about but would not describe to anyone who asked directly. Their mother retreated into religion, spending hours in the temple of Hera, which was the traditional refuge of royal women who found their domestic situations unbearable but lacked the social permission to say so. The court continued its slow, elaborate dance of power and pretense.</p>
<p>And something changed between the brothers, so slowly that neither of them noticed it happening until it had already happened, the way you don’t notice the tide going out until you look up and the water is fifty yards from where it was and the rocks are showing, slick and dark and covered with things that were not meant to be seen.</p>
<p>The change was this: Deliades began to be afraid of Hipponous.</p>
<p>Not physically afraid. Deliades was bigger, stronger, and, in a straight fight, probably the victor (though it would have been closer than most people expected). The fear was subtler than that. It was the fear of being overshadowed, of being revealed as the lesser version, of discovering that the qualities he had always believed were his great strengths (his ease, his charm, his ability to make people comfortable) were, in fact, merely the absence of the qualities that made his brother dangerous. Deliades was likeable. Hipponous was remarkable. And in the currency of myth and memory, likeability is copper and remarkableness is gold.</p>
<p>This fear expressed itself, as fear often does, in small cruelties. A joke that was slightly too sharp. A public correction that was slightly too loud. A tendency to interrupt Hipponous in conversation, to talk over him, to redirect attention back to himself with the practiced ease of a man who has always been the center of attention and is beginning to sense, with a growing unease that he cannot quite name, that the center is shifting.</p>
<p>Hipponous noticed. Of course he noticed; he noticed everything, that was his gift and his curse. But he did not respond, because responding would mean acknowledging the shift, and acknowledging the shift would mean confronting the truth that lived at the bottom of their brotherhood like a stone at the bottom of a well: that love and rivalry are not opposites but twins, born from the same mother, sharing the same face, and that eventually, inevitably, one of them would have to die so the other could live.</p>
<p>He did not know, sitting in his room in the palace of Corinth, watching the winter rain streak the windows and listening to the distant sound of his father’s horses screaming in their stables, that the death would be literal.</p>
<p>But some part of him, the deep, dark, Sisyphean part that understood things before they happened and saw patterns before they emerged, suspected it. And that part, which lived in the lowest room of his mind’s palace, in a chamber with no windows and a door that was always locked, was already, in its quiet, methodical way, preparing for what was to come.</p>
<p>Not planning it. Not wanting it. Simply recognizing, with the clarity that is the special burden of those who are cursed with too much self-knowledge, that some tragedies do not arrive from outside but grow from within, like a tree whose roots have been working in the dark for years, splitting the foundation stone by stone, until the whole structure, which from the outside still looks solid and permanent and fine, collapses inward on itself with a sound that is not a crash but a sigh.</p>
<p>The tree was growing. The roots were deep. And Hipponous, the boy who would soon be called Bellerophon, which means “the killer,” slept in his bed in the palace of Corinth and dreamed of a white horse with wings, and the horse looked at him with eyes that held no judgment, only the infinite, patient, terrifying compassion of a creature that already knew everything that was going to happen and loved him anyway.</p>
</div>
<div class="chapter">
<div class="chapter-header">
<span class="chapter-label">— Chapter Two —</span>
<section id="the-blood-on-the-stone" class="level2 chapter-title">
<h2 class="chapter-title">The Blood on the Stone</h2>
</section>
</div>
<p>The hunt had been Deliades’s idea, which was something Hipponous would remember later with the peculiar, poisonous clarity that guilt bestows on every detail of the hours leading up to an irreversible act. Deliades had proposed it at breakfast, in the great hall where the morning light came through the high eastern windows in long golden shafts that caught the dust motes and made them look, if you were in a certain frame of mind, like tiny stars falling upward. He had been cheerful, energetic, full of the restless physical vitality that always overtook him after a period of rain, when the weather had kept him indoors and his body, which was built for motion the way a ship is built for water, had grown tight and irritable with disuse.</p>
<p>“A boar hunt,” he said, tearing bread with his fingers and dipping it into a bowl of olive oil and thyme. “On the slopes of the Acrocorinth. Lykon saw tracks yesterday, fresh ones, a big animal. We could take the dogs, be out by midmorning, back by dark.”</p>
<p>Their father looked up from the wax tablet he was studying (a report on the horse breeding stock, to judge by the intensity of his expression) and grunted something that might have been approval or might have been indifference. Their mother was not present; she was at the temple of Hera, as she increasingly was in the mornings, seeking from the goddess the stability that her household could no longer provide.</p>
<p>Hipponous said nothing. He was eating an apple, methodically, with a knife, cutting each slice with the precision of a surgeon and eating it off the blade, a habit that his mother found unsettling and his father found affected but which was, in fact, simply the way his hands worked when his mind was elsewhere. His mind, this morning, was in several places at once, none of them the breakfast table. He had dreamed of the white horse again. The dream had been different this time, closer, more urgent. The horse had been standing at the edge of a spring, drinking, and the water had been so clear that the reflection was indistinguishable from the creature itself, so that there seemed to be two horses, one above and one below, mirror images separated by a surface as thin as a thought. He had reached out to touch the horse, and the moment before his hand made contact, he had woken, and the loss, the awful, aching absence of the touch he had almost had, was still with him, a phantom sensation in his fingertips.</p>
<p>“Hipponous?” Deliades was looking at him with that particular expression, half amusement and half exasperation, that he reserved for moments when his younger brother had clearly not been listening. “The hunt. Are you coming?”</p>
<p>“Yes,” Hipponous said. “I’ll come.”</p>
<p>He did not want to go. He wanted to be alone, to sit with the remnants of the dream and try to understand what it meant, because the dreams were becoming more frequent and more vivid and there was a quality to them now, an insistence, as though the horse was not merely an image his sleeping mind had conjured but a real creature in a real place, trying, with increasing urgency, to tell him something. But Deliades had asked, and Deliades rarely asked for things (he was more accustomed to announcing them), and the asking itself was a kind of offering, an olive branch extended across the growing distance between them, and Hipponous, despite his reputation for coldness, was not so far gone that he could refuse an olive branch from his own brother.</p>
<p>This is how it happens, sometimes. The worst days of your life begin with small acts of kindness.</p>
<div class="section-break">
✦   ✦   ✦
</div>
<p>They set out at midmorning with six dogs, three servants, and a pair of hunting javelins each. The day was bright and cool, the kind of late-spring day when the sky is so deeply blue that it looks painted, and the pine trees on the upper slopes of the Acrocorinth exhale their resin-scented breath into the warming air, creating a perfume that is, if you are Corinthian, the smell of home itself. The path wound upward through olive groves that gave way to scrub oak, which gave way to pine, the trees growing taller and darker as the brothers climbed, their trunks straight as columns, their canopy filtering the sunlight into shifting patterns on the needle-strewn ground.</p>
<p>For the first hour, things were good. Better than good, actually; for the first time in months, the old ease between them returned, the wordless synchronicity that had characterized their childhood, when they could communicate entire strategies with a glance and finish each other’s sentences with an accuracy that their mother found charming and their father found slightly eerie. Deliades led and Hipponous flanked, and the dogs ranged ahead in a loose half-circle, noses to the ground, tails high, doing the thing they had been bred to do with a single-minded joy that was, if you thought about it (and Hipponous thought about everything), rather beautiful.</p>
<p>They talked. Not about important things. About the hunt, about the dogs, about a girl in the market whom Deliades was courting with the cheerful persistence of a man who has never been refused and cannot quite believe that this particular girl seems determined to be the first. About a new ship that had arrived from Egypt carrying spices that smelled, according to the harbor master, “like the inside of a god’s wardrobe,” a description so bizarre that it had become a running joke in the palace. About nothing. About everything. About the thousand small, forgettable, irreplaceable things that constitute a conversation between two people who love each other and have not yet realized that they are running out of time.</p>
<p>The dogs found the boar’s trail at the edge of a ravine, a narrow, steep-sided gully that cut through the mountainside like a wound. The ground here was soft from recent rain, and the tracks were clear: a large animal, moving uphill, its hooves sinking deep into the mud. The dogs went mad, as dogs do when the scent is fresh, their baying rising in pitch and volume until the sound echoed off the rock walls and came back multiplied, as though there were fifty dogs rather than six.</p>
<p>“Big one,” Deliades said, examining a track with the practiced eye of a hunter. His voice had changed; the easy warmth was still there, but underneath it was something harder, more focused, the ancestral alertness of a predator who has caught the scent. “Old male, I think. See the width of the print? And these scratch marks beside the hoof? That’s where the tusks drag the ground when it lowers its head to root. Long tusks. Very long.”</p>
<p>Hipponous looked at the tracks and saw what his brother saw, and more. He saw the depth of the impressions, which indicated weight; the spacing, which indicated stride length; the slight asymmetry in the rear prints, which suggested a limp or an old injury in the right hind leg. The boar was large, yes, and old, and probably ill-tempered (old boars with injuries being, as a general rule, the most dangerous creatures in the Greek countryside, surpassing even snakes and tax collectors in their capacity for sudden, disproportionate violence). It was also, he noted with a quiet unease that he could not entirely explain, heading deeper into the ravine, which was not the sort of place you wanted to corner a wounded animal. Ravines funneled. Ravines trapped. Ravines turned the open geometry of a hunt into the narrow, claustrophobic geometry of a fight.</p>
<p>“We should go around,” Hipponous said. “Come at it from above. Drive it down into the open.”</p>
<p>Deliades shook his head. “Too slow. It’ll be dark before we circle the ridge. We follow it in.”</p>
<p>“The ravine is narrow. If it charges, there’s nowhere to go.”</p>
<p>“Then we’d better not miss,” Deliades said, and grinned, and the grin was so full of reckless confidence, so completely and characteristically Deliades, that Hipponous felt a surge of something that was partly admiration and partly fear and partly the old, familiar frustration of loving someone who seemed to believe that the rules of mortality applied to everyone except himself.</p>
<p>They sent the servants to the upper rim of the ravine with the spare javelins and instructions to shout if the boar doubled back. Then the two brothers, with four of the six dogs (the other two having been left with the servants, being young and poorly trained and more likely to cause chaos than contribute to the hunt), descended into the ravine.</p>
<div class="section-break">
✦   ✦   ✦
</div>
<p>The light changed as they went down. The bright, open sunlight of the upper slopes was replaced by a filtered, greenish dimness, the ravine walls rising on either side like the walls of a roofless corridor, their surfaces dark with moisture and patched with ferns and moss. The air was cooler here, and damper, and carried a different set of smells: wet stone, rotting leaves, the musky, acrid scent of animal that was either very close or had been here very recently. The dogs were quieter now, their baying replaced by a low, intense whining, their bodies pressed close to the ground, every muscle taut with the particular combination of excitement and terror that comes from being near something large and dangerous.</p>
<p>Hipponous felt the change in his body before he felt it in his mind. His shoulders tightened. His grip on the javelin shifted, almost of its own accord, from the relaxed carry position to the ready position, the weight balanced on the balls of his feet, his center of gravity low. He had been trained to fight since childhood, as all princes were, and the training lived in his muscles and his reflexes in a way that was deeper than thought, a kind of bodily wisdom that could assess a threat and calculate a response faster than the conscious mind could form a sentence.</p>
<p>Something was wrong. He could feel it, the way you feel a storm coming before you see the clouds, a prickling awareness that the world had shifted slightly off its axis and that the thing you had been moving toward was not the thing you expected to find.</p>
<p>“Deliades,” he said. “Wait.”</p>
<p>But Deliades was ahead of him, ten paces, then fifteen, moving with the focused intensity of a man who has committed to a course of action and will not be diverted, and either he did not hear his brother or he chose not to, which amounts, in the mathematics of consequence, to the same thing.</p>
<p>The ravine curved. Deliades went around the curve. Hipponous followed.</p>
<p>And there it was.</p>
<p>The boar was enormous. Hipponous had seen large boars before, had helped hunt them since he was thirteen, and he had thought he understood what the word “large” meant when applied to these animals. He had been wrong. This creature was not merely large; it was a monument, a thing of impossible mass and density, standing in the narrow ravine like a boulder that had decided to grow legs and tusks and a murderous disposition. Its shoulders were as high as a man’s waist. Its bristles, dark and coarse, stood up along its spine like the hackles of a dog, giving it a ridged, almost reptilian silhouette. Its tusks were yellow-white and curved upward from its lower jaw like the prows of two small ships, their tips worn to points that caught the dim light and gleamed.</p>
<p>It was facing them. Its small, red-rimmed eyes, set deep in the armored mass of its skull, were fixed on Deliades with an expression that was not fear (boars of this size had, in their experience, very little to fear) but rather a cold, calculating assessment, the look of a creature deciding not whether to fight but how.</p>
<p>Deliades stopped. Hipponous could see the moment of recalculation in his brother’s posture, the slight stiffening of the spine, the almost imperceptible shift in the angle of the javelin as Deliades realized that this was not the hunt he had imagined. This was something else. This was the ravine and the boar and the narrow walls and no room to dodge and the growing, cold-water understanding that he had made a mistake.</p>
<p>But Deliades was Deliades, and Deliades did not retreat.</p>
<p>He threw.</p>
<p>The javelin was well aimed. It struck the boar in the shoulder, sinking in a hand’s breadth before hitting the dense bone and muscle that armored the animal’s front quarters. In a smaller boar, it might have been a killing blow. In this boar, it was an insult.</p>
<p>The creature screamed. It was not a sound that any word in any human language adequately describes; it was a sound that belonged to the oldest, darkest part of the world, the part that existed before gods and men and language, the part that was pure animal rage, unmediated by consciousness or mercy. And then it charged.</p>
<p>What happened next took perhaps four seconds. It would take Hipponous the rest of his life to understand it.</p>
<p>The boar came at Deliades like a battering ram. Deliades reached for his second javelin. His foot slipped on the wet stone. He went down on one knee, and the boar was on him, and Hipponous saw the tusk catch his brother’s thigh and open it like a knife opening a purse, and Deliades made a sound that was nothing like a scream, a quiet, surprised, almost conversational sound, the sound of a man who has been expecting something entirely different from what he has received.</p>
<p>Hipponous threw his javelin.</p>
<p>Here is the moment. Here is the fulcrum on which everything turns, the point of no return, the instant that divides Hipponous’s life into before and after with the finality of a cleaver dividing a joint. He threw his javelin at the boar, which was mauling his brother in the narrow ravine, and the javelin flew true, as his javelins always did because he was a better hunter than Deliades had ever been, and the javelin struck.</p>
<p>It struck the boar.</p>
<p>It struck his brother.</p>
<p>It passed through the boar’s neck, which was an extraordinary cast, a once-in-a-lifetime throw of perfect force and angle, the kind of throw that, under any other circumstances, would have been celebrated for a generation. The iron point entered below the animal’s ear and traveled through muscle and artery and emerged from the other side, and the boar collapsed like a building falling, its legs folding beneath it, its massive body hitting the stone floor of the ravine with an impact that Hipponous felt through the soles of his feet.</p>
<p>And the javelin, continuing its trajectory with the blind indifference of all projectiles to the intentions of those who throw them, entered Deliades’s chest.</p>
<p>It went in just below the collarbone, on the left side, at the juncture of shoulder and chest where the great vessels run close to the surface. It was not a deep wound. A hand’s breadth, perhaps less. Under other circumstances, a physician might have saved him. But the boar had already opened his thigh, and the blood was coming fast from that wound, and the javelin’s entry into his chest, though shallow, had nicked something vital, something that should not be nicked, and the two wounds together were doing what neither alone could have done.</p>
<p>Hipponous was at his brother’s side in an instant. He pulled the javelin free (a mistake, he would learn later; you should never pull a weapon from a wound, because the weapon is sometimes the only thing keeping the blood inside, but he was seventeen and terrified and acting on instinct, and instinct, despite being older and wiser than reason, is not always right). The blood came faster. It was very red. It was the only color in the ravine; everything else had gone grey, as though the world itself were bleeding out along with Deliades.</p>
<p>“Hold on,” Hipponous said, and his voice was strange in his own ears, too calm, the voice of a person who has stepped outside himself and is watching the scene from a great distance. “Hold on. I’m going to stop the bleeding. Hold on.”</p>
<p>Deliades looked up at him. His golden face was very white. His eyes, those warm brown eyes that had always looked at the world with such generous ease, were wide and dark, the pupils blown, and in them Hipponous could see himself reflected, small and dark and desperate, a tiny figure trapped in the amber of his brother’s gaze.</p>
<p>“Hipponous,” Deliades said. Just his name. Just that.</p>
<p>And Hipponous pressed his hands against his brother’s chest and felt the blood, hot and wet and impossibly fast, pulsing between his fingers in a rhythm that was slowing, slowing, like the rhythm of a song that the singer has forgotten the words to, and he said “hold on” and “please” and “don’t” and all the other useless, desperate, inadequate things that people say when the person they love is dying and words are revealed for what they truly are: sounds, air, nothing, the last and most futile weapon in the human arsenal.</p>
<p>Deliades died on the floor of the ravine with his brother’s hands on his chest and the boar’s carcass beside him and the four dogs whimpering in a huddle against the far wall. He died quietly, which was not what Hipponous expected. He had imagined death as dramatic, as the myths described it: the great speech, the final words, the meaningful last breath. But Deliades simply stopped. One moment he was a person; the next he was an object. The transition was so quick, so absolute, so devoid of ceremony, that Hipponous’s mind could not process it, could not reconcile the living brother he had been speaking to moments ago with this still, cooling thing beneath his hands.</p>
<p>He stayed there for a long time. He stayed there until the servants, hearing the boar’s scream and the silence that followed, found their way down into the ravine and saw what there was to see: the enormous boar with the javelin through its neck, and the prince of Corinth with the javelin wound in his chest, and the other prince of Corinth kneeling in a pool of blood so large that it had filled the spaces between the stones and was creeping, slowly and with the idiot persistence of all liquids, toward the lowest point of the ground.</p>
<div class="section-break">
✦   ✦   ✦
</div>
<p>They carried Deliades down the mountain on a makeshift litter of pine branches and cloaks. Hipponous walked beside the litter, his hands still red, his chiton soaked and stiffening with blood that was turning, as blood does when it dries, from red to a dark, rusty brown that was the color, he could not help noticing, of old copper. His mind was performing the strange, clinical trick that minds perform when the reality they are confronted with is too large to be felt all at once: it was cataloguing details. The texture of the pine bark under his fingers. The angle of the late-afternoon sun. The sound of the servants’ feet on the path. The weight of the body on the litter. The precise shade of the blood on his hands.</p>
<p>He did not cry. This is worth noting, because the servants noted it, and the soldiers who met them at the city gates noted it, and the court noted it when the procession reached the palace, and the absence of tears was interpreted, by people who did not know him, as evidence of coldness, of guilt, of a heart so dark that it could not summon grief even for a brother. This interpretation was wrong, but it was the kind of wrong that becomes, through repetition and consensus, indistinguishable from truth. Hipponous did not cry because he was in shock, and because his grief was of the kind that goes too deep for tears, the kind that settles in the bones and the blood and the deep architecture of the self, and stays there, and does not leave, and does not diminish, and does not, despite what people who have never experienced it like to believe, get better with time.</p>
<p>Glaucus met them at the palace gates. He looked at the litter. He looked at his son’s body. He looked at Hipponous, standing there with his red hands and his dry eyes and his face that was, in its expressionlessness, more terrible than any display of grief could have been. And something happened in Glaucus’s face that Hipponous would remember for as long as he lived: a closing, a shutting, as though a door had been slammed behind his father’s eyes, and the man who lived behind that door, the man who might have said “it was an accident” or “it wasn’t your fault” or “come here, let me hold you, you are still my son,” had retreated into a room from which he would never emerge.</p>
<p>“What happened,” Glaucus said. Not a question. A demand.</p>
<p>Hipponous told him. The words came out flat, factual, stripped of emotion, not because he didn’t feel but because feeling, at this moment, was an ocean, and if he opened the door to it even a crack, it would drown him. He described the hunt, the ravine, the boar, the throw. He described the javelin passing through the boar and into Deliades. He described trying to stop the bleeding. He described failing.</p>
<p>Glaucus listened. When Hipponous finished, the silence stretched between them like a wire, tight and humming, and then Glaucus said, in a voice so quiet that only Hipponous could hear it: “You always were the better hunter.”</p>
<p>It was not an accusation. Or rather, it was an accusation, but of a crime more subtle than murder: the crime of being too skilled, too precise, too gifted, in a moment when a lesser throw would have missed both the boar and the brother. It was the accusation of competence, which is, in certain tragic circumstances, indistinguishable from the accusation of intent. You threw too well. Your aim was too true. The javelin did exactly what you trained it to do. What does it say about you that your greatest skill has produced your greatest catastrophe?</p>
<p>Hipponous opened his mouth to say something (he did not know what; his mind, which was usually so full of words, was empty, a blank space where language should have been) and found that he could not speak. His throat had closed. His body, which had been holding itself together with the desperate rigidity of a cracked wall, was beginning to fail, and he could feel the cracks widening, could feel the structure shifting, could feel the moment approaching when the whole edifice would collapse.</p>
<p>Glaucus turned away. He walked to the litter where Deliades lay, and he placed his hand on his dead son’s forehead, and the sound he made was not a word but something older and more fundamental, a sound that came from the part of the body where grief lives before it has been translated into language, and it was, Hipponous thought, the most honest sound his father had ever made.</p>
<p>Hipponous stood in the courtyard of the palace with his dead brother behind him and his turned-away father before him and the blood drying on his hands, and he understood, with a clarity that was like being struck by lightning, that his life in Corinth was over. Not because anyone would formally exile him (though they might; kinslaying was the deepest taboo, the one crime that even the most lenient judge could not overlook, regardless of intent). Not because he could not explain what had happened (the servants had seen the boar; they could testify that the throw was meant for the animal; the evidence of accident was overwhelming). But because every time Glaucus looked at him, he would see Deliades. Every time anyone in Corinth looked at him, they would see the brother who had lived instead of the brother who had died. He would become a living memorial to the wrong son, a constant reminder that the world had made a mistake, had taken the golden one and left the dark one, had subtracted the sum and left the remainder, and the remainder, however large, would never be enough to compensate for what had been lost.</p>
<p>He could not live as a remainder. No one could.</p>
<div class="section-break">
✦   ✦   ✦
</div>
<p>They burned Deliades on a pyre at the summit of the lower hill, below the Acrocorinth, on a platform of oak and pine that the carpenters built in a single day and night, working by torchlight with the grim efficiency of men who understood that the family they served was not the sort of family that tolerated delay. The body was wrapped in white linen and laid upon the wood, and around it they placed the things that the dead were supposed to need in the underworld: a sword, a shield, a pair of sandals, a jug of wine, a bowl of honey, a lock of his mother’s hair. The dogs that had been on the hunt were sacrificed and placed at his feet (Hipponous argued against this; it was the dogs, after all, who had found the boar and driven it into the ravine and thereby set the whole catastrophe in motion, and killing them felt less like honor and more like scapegoating; but tradition was tradition, and in Corinth, tradition was the one authority that not even a prince could overrule).</p>
<p>Glaucus lit the pyre. The fire caught quickly, as fires do when the wood is dry and the wind is right, and within minutes the flames were taller than a man, roaring and snapping and sending a column of smoke into the evening sky that was visible, they said later, from as far away as Megara. The smoke was dark at first, then grey, then white, and it rose in a straight column, barely bending, which the priests said was a sign that the gods were pleased with the offering and would welcome the dead man’s shade, though it might equally have been a sign that the wind was calm, which was a meteorological observation that no one was in the mood to make.</p>
<p>Hipponous stood at the edge of the pyre and watched his brother burn. The heat was immense, a physical force that pushed against his face and chest like a hand, and the smell was terrible, the sweet-sick smell of burning flesh that no amount of incense or fragrant wood could entirely mask. He did not look away. He owed Deliades that much, at least: to witness what he had caused, to stand in the heat and the stench and the roaring, consuming reality of what a body becomes when the person has left it and the fire has been given permission to do what fire always wants to do.</p>
<p>His mother stood beside him. She had not spoken to him since the body was brought down the mountain. She had not looked at him. She stood rigid and upright, her face set in an expression of formal grief that was, Hipponous understood, not a performance but a fortress, a wall of protocol and propriety behind which the real grief was happening, private and terrible and none of his business. When the pyre collapsed inward on itself with a sound like a great sigh, she flinched, and her hand moved, just slightly, in his direction, and for a moment he thought she was reaching for him, and his heart leaped with a desperate, childish hope that made him feel, simultaneously, grateful and ashamed.</p>
<p>But she was not reaching for him. She was reaching for the small clay figure of Hera that she carried in the fold of her robe, and her fingers closed around it, and whatever comfort the goddess provided, it was the goddess who provided it, and not her surviving son.</p>
<p>After the burning, there was the gathering of the bones. This was done the next morning, when the pyre had cooled enough to approach, by the women of the household, who picked through the ashes with bare hands and collected the fragments of bone that the fire had not consumed. These were washed in wine, wrapped in fat, and placed in a golden urn that was buried at the foot of the hill, under a stone cairn that would, in time, become a minor landmark, a place where travelers would stop and ask “Who is buried here?” and be told “A prince of Corinth, killed by his brother in a hunting accident,” and nod, and move on, because the world was full of dead princes and the details of their deaths were, to anyone who had not loved them, merely stories.</p>
<p>Hipponous did not help gather the bones. He was not allowed. The killer of a man, even an accidental killer, was considered ritually polluted, and his touch would contaminate the remains and prevent the dead man’s shade from finding rest. This was the law, and it was the law that gave Hipponous his new name.</p>
<p>Bellerophon. The killer. The one who has shed blood that should not have been shed.</p>
<p>It was not, technically, his name. It was a title, or a label, or a brand, depending on how one felt about the person it was applied to. His birth name, Hipponous, meant “horse-minded,” which was a fine, respectable Corinthian name that evoked speed and nobility and the deep bond between man and horse that was central to the culture of the city. Bellerophon meant something darker. It meant the weight of blood. It meant the stain that could not be washed out. It meant that wherever he went, for the rest of his life, the first thing people would know about him was that he had killed someone, and the second thing they would know was that the someone had been family.</p>
<p>He accepted the name. What else could he do? To reject it would be to deny what he had done, and he could not deny it, because the blood was on his hands (literally, for days afterward, despite washing; it had gotten into the creases of his knuckles and the beds of his nails and refused, with a persistence that he could not help admiring in a grim, detached way, to come entirely clean). He had thrown the javelin. The javelin had killed his brother. The intention behind the throw was irrelevant; the result was absolute. A man was dead, and the man who had killed him would carry the name of that killing like a second shadow, present in every room he entered, visible in every face that looked at him.</p>
<div class="section-break">
✦   ✦   ✦
</div>
<p>He left Corinth on a morning so early that the sky was still grey and the streets were empty except for the cats and the bakers and the women carrying water from the public fountains. He carried a pack with a change of clothes, a knife, a water skin, and a small leather bag of coins that his mother had left outside his door in the night, without a note, without a word, the offering both too much and too little, as all gestures of love are when the person making them cannot bring themselves to make the gesture that is actually needed.</p>
<p>He did not say goodbye to his father. Glaucus had not spoken to him since the day of the hunt, and the silence had calcified into something that was no longer silence but a statement, a verdict delivered without the formality of a trial. Hipponous (Bellerophon, he must remember, Bellerophon now, the old name discarded like a skin that has been shed) understood the verdict. He did not agree with it, because the throw had been aimed at the boar and the boar alone, and any fair assessment of the evidence would have concluded that the death was an accident. But fairness is a concept that belongs to law courts and philosophers, and grief is answerable to neither.</p>
<p>He walked through the sleeping city, past the agora with its shuttered stalls, past the temple of Apollo where the priests were already preparing the morning offerings, past the fountain of Pirene where the sacred spring bubbled up from the rock and the water was so clear that you could see the mosaic tiles at the bottom, ten feet down, as sharply as if they were lying on a table in front of you. He paused at the fountain. There was something about it that tugged at him, a sense of recognition, of significance, as though the spring were not merely a geographical feature but a marker, a pin on a map that his sleeping mind had been studying for years. The white horse drank here. In the dreams, the white horse always came to a spring, and the water was clear, and the reflection was perfect, and the horse looked at him with those sky-colored eyes.</p>
<p>But the spring was just a spring, and the horse was just a dream, and he was just a boy who had killed his brother and was leaving home because there was nothing left for him here except the company of ghosts and the slow, corrosive accumulation of guilt.</p>
<p>He turned south. He would go to Argos, or perhaps to Tiryns. Somewhere he was not known. Somewhere the name Bellerophon would be a sound without a story, at least for a while. Somewhere he could seek purification from a king or a priest, the ritual cleansing that was supposed to wash the stain of bloodshed from a man’s soul, though Bellerophon suspected, with the weary cynicism of a seventeen-year-old who has already learned more about the world than most people learn in a lifetime, that the stain was not the kind that water and prayers could remove.</p>
<p>The road south was dusty and empty. The sun came up behind him, throwing his shadow long and dark on the road ahead, so that he was walking into his own shadow, following it, chasing it, unable to outpace it no matter how fast he walked. It was a small, stupid observation, the kind of thing that would not normally have registered, but in his current state, everything felt weighted with meaning, as though the world had become a language and he was only now learning to read it.</p>
<p>He walked. Behind him, Corinth shrank, first to a city, then to a collection of white dots on a hillside, then to a smudge, then to a memory. He did not look back. Not because he didn’t want to (he did; the desire to turn around was so strong it was almost physical, a force pulling at the base of his spine, turning his head, whispering that if he went back, he could explain, could make them understand, could undo what had been done). He did not look back because looking back was what his grandfather would have done. Sisyphus had always been looking back, always trying to undo, to reverse, to cheat the consequences of his own actions. And Sisyphus was in the underworld, pushing a boulder up a hill forever.</p>
<p>Bellerophon walked south, into his shadow, carrying his dead brother like a stone in his chest, and he did not look back, and behind him the smoke from the morning fires of Corinth rose into the sky and was carried by the wind over the sea, where it dissolved into the blue and was gone, as though it had never been there at all, as though nothing had happened, as though the world were the same world it had been yesterday, which, of course, it was, because the world does not care about the tragedies of princes. The world does not care about anything. The world simply continues, vast and indifferent and beautiful, and the people in it do their best to keep up, and when they fail, as they always do, the world does not notice, and the sun rises, and the tides come in, and the rivers run to the sea, and somewhere, on a mountain or beside a spring or in a place that exists only in the space between sleeping and waking, a white horse with wings lifts its head and listens to a sound that only it can hear.</p>
</div>
<div class="chapter">
<div class="chapter-header">
<span class="chapter-label">— Chapter Three —</span>
<section id="the-court-of-argos" class="level2 chapter-title">
<h2 class="chapter-title">The Court of Argos</h2>
</section>
</div>
<p>Argos was older than Corinth, and it looked it. Where Corinth had the brash, polished energy of a city that had made its fortune recently and wanted everyone to admire it, Argos had the heavy, settled weight of a place that had been important for so long that it no longer felt the need to prove it. The walls were massive, built of blocks so large that later generations would call them Cyclopean, believing that only the one-eyed giants could have lifted stones of that size, which was flattering to the giants but somewhat dismissive of the engineering capabilities of the men who had actually done the work. The streets were narrow and winding, following paths that had been established when the city was a village and the village was a collection of huts and the huts were clustered around a spring that still bubbled, dark and warm, in the central courtyard of the palace. Everything in Argos was old, and everything in Argos remembered that it was old, and the effect was either majestic or oppressive, depending on whether you were visiting or trying to leave.</p>
<p>Bellerophon arrived at the gates of Argos on a day when the sky was the color of pewter and a thin, persistent rain was falling, the kind of rain that does not so much fall as materialize, appearing on your skin and your clothes and in your hair without any apparent source, as though the air itself were sweating. He had been walking for four days, sleeping in olive groves and eating bread and cheese that he had bought from a farmstead on the road, and he looked, by his own estimation, like exactly what he was: a young man in trouble, carrying nothing of value except a name that he did not want and a story that he could not tell.</p>
<p>The guards at the gate looked at him with the particular expression of professional skepticism that guards everywhere develop, the expression that says: “I have seen a thousand people approach this gate, and approximately nine hundred and fifty of them have been liars, and I see no reason to believe that you are one of the fifty.” They asked his name. He told them. They asked his business. He said he sought an audience with King Proetus, to request the rite of purification.</p>
<p>The guards exchanged a glance. The rite of purification was not an unusual request; it was, in fact, one of the primary services that a powerful king offered, a combination of religious ceremony and political favor that served the dual purpose of cleansing the supplicant’s guilt and binding him, through gratitude and obligation, to the king who had performed the cleansing. A king who purified a man was, in a sense, that man’s second father, the one who had given him rebirth, and the obligations of this relationship were as binding as the obligations of blood. This was why Bellerophon had chosen Argos: Proetus was powerful enough that his purification would be recognized across Greece, and honorable enough that the obligation would be a matter of legitimate patronage rather than servitude.</p>
<p>Or so Bellerophon hoped. He had researched the matter as carefully as a seventeen-year-old in exile could, which is to say, he had asked questions at every tavern and crossroads between Corinth and Argos and had assembled, from the scattered and frequently contradictory answers, a picture of Proetus that was probably sixty percent accurate, which was as good as anyone could expect when relying on tavern intelligence.</p>
<p>The guards admitted him. He was led through the outer court, across a broad flagstone yard where soldiers were drilling in the rain with the stoic misery of men who have been ordered to practice sword work in bad weather by a superior who is watching from a dry window, and into the palace proper.</p>
<div class="section-break">
✦   ✦   ✦
</div>
<p>The palace of Argos was not beautiful, but it was impressive in the way that a fortress is impressive: through sheer mass and the unmistakable suggestion that it could, if provoked, crush you. The walls were thick enough to contain corridors within them, and the corridors were lit by oil lamps that burned perpetually, filling the passages with a warm, slightly smoky light that made everything look as though it were happening inside a painting. The floors were stone, covered in places with woven rugs that muffled footsteps and gave the otherwise martial space a touch of domesticity, like a general who keeps flowers on his desk.</p>
<p>Bellerophon was brought to the great hall, which was a room of considerable size and considerable gloom, its ceiling supported by painted columns and its walls decorated with frescoes depicting, in the heroic style, the deeds of Proetus’s ancestors, most of whom appeared to be killing things. At the far end of the hall, on a chair that was not quite a throne but was clearly more than a chair (it was raised on a low platform and flanked by two stone lions, which was the Argive way of saying “this is where the king sits, and if you were in any doubt about that, please observe the lions”), sat Proetus, King of Argos.</p>
<p>He was a man in his middle years, solidly built, with the kind of face that is described as “strong” by those who admire it and “blunt” by those who do not. His beard was dark, heavily threaded with grey, and trimmed in the Argive fashion, square and close. His eyes were grey as well, the pale grey of winter sky, and they regarded Bellerophon with an expression that was neither friendly nor hostile but simply attentive, the expression of a man who has learned, through long experience, that the first thing a person says is almost never the most important thing, and that patience is more useful than curiosity.</p>
<p>Beside him, in a chair that was smaller but no less ornate, sat the queen.</p>
<p>Stheneboea. Also called Anteia in some tellings, though she preferred Stheneboea, which meant “strong in counsel,” and which she considered more accurately descriptive of her character than a name that merely indicated where her family was from. She was younger than Proetus by perhaps ten years, and she was beautiful, though “beautiful” is a word that tells you nothing useful unless you understand the specific nature of the beauty in question. Stheneboea’s beauty was the kind that operates less on the eyes than on the nervous system; you did not so much see her as feel her, the way you feel the first warm day of spring, as a change in the atmosphere, a sudden aliveness in the blood. She had dark hair, very thick, worn up in the complex Argive style with gold pins and a thin diadem. Her skin was the particular shade of warm olive that the Argive aristocracy had been breeding into itself for generations. Her eyes were dark and very large and held an expression that Bellerophon, who was good at reading people (another gift from Grandfather Sisyphus, whose survival had depended on his ability to assess, in an instant, what a person wanted and how that want could be exploited), recognized immediately: she was bored.</p>
<p>Not bored in the superficial sense of having nothing to do (a queen always had things to do; the management of a royal household was a full-time occupation that required diplomatic skills rivaling those of the king himself). Bored in the deeper, more dangerous sense of being unfulfilled, of having a mind and a will and an appetite that the circumstances of her life could not satisfy. She was a woman of intelligence married to a man of duty, and the gap between intelligence and duty is a space in which dangerous things can grow.</p>
<p>Bellerophon knelt before the throne. He stated his name. He stated his crime. He asked for purification.</p>
<p>Proetus listened. He asked questions: where, how, when. Bellerophon answered, and his answers were the truth, but they were the truth stripped of emotion, the bare facts presented in their proper order, because Bellerophon had learned, in the days since his brother’s death, that emotion was a luxury he could not afford. Emotion opened doors that he needed to keep closed. Behind those doors were rooms full of blood and bone and the sound of his brother saying his name, just his name, as the light left his eyes, and if he opened those doors, even for a moment, he would not be able to close them again.</p>
<p>Proetus nodded. “We will purify you,” he said. “At the new moon. Three days from now. Until then, you are a guest in this house, and the laws of hospitality apply to you as they apply to all who eat bread and drink wine under this roof. You are under the protection of Zeus Xenios, and anyone who harms you harms me.”</p>
<p>It was a formula, the standard proclamation of guest-right, but Proetus said it with a weight and a directness that suggested he meant every word, and Bellerophon, for the first time in four days, felt something that was not grief or guilt or the dull, grinding exhaustion of walking alone through a hostile world. He felt safe. Not happy, not at peace, but safe, which was, at this particular moment, more than enough.</p>
<p>“Thank you,” he said, and meant it, and Proetus inclined his head in acknowledgment, and the matter was settled.</p>
<p>He did not look at the queen. He was aware of her, the way you are aware of a fire in a room, as a source of warmth and light and potential danger, but he did not look at her, because looking would mean seeing, and seeing would mean acknowledging what he had already sensed: that she was looking at him with an interest that had nothing to do with his crime and everything to do with the fact that he was young, and handsome, and haunted, and that haunted young men are, to certain kinds of women, irresistible, not because of what they are but because of what they represent, which is the possibility of something different, something intense, something that burns.</p>
<p>Stheneboea was watching. Bellerophon could feel her gaze on his skin like sunlight through glass, focused and warm and slightly too intense for comfort.</p>
<p>He did not look.</p>
<div class="section-break">
✦   ✦   ✦
</div>
<p>The purification was performed three days later, at dawn, in the courtyard of the palace beside the ancient spring. Proetus officiated, assisted by a priest of Zeus whose name Bellerophon never learned and whose face he would never remember, because the ritual itself consumed all of his attention, filling his senses so completely that everything peripheral was washed away, like footprints erased by a rising tide.</p>
<p>The ritual was this:</p>
<p>First, the sacrifice. A young pig, unblemished, its throat cut with a bronze knife over a shallow stone basin. The blood, bright and hot and startlingly copious, filled the basin and overflowed, running in thin red rivulets across the courtyard stones. Bellerophon watched the blood and remembered other blood, darker, slower, blood that had pulsed between his fingers in a rhythm that was slowing, and he forced the memory down, locked it behind one of the doors in his mind, and concentrated on the ritual, on the here, on the now.</p>
<p>Second, the washing. The priest poured water over Bellerophon’s hands, water from the spring, cold and clear, and as the water ran over his skin, it mixed with the pig’s blood that had been daubed on his wrists (this was part of the ritual: the supplicant’s hands were marked with the blood of the sacrifice, symbolizing the blood he had spilled, and then the blood was washed away, symbolizing the removal of guilt). The water turned pink, then red, then clear again, and Bellerophon watched the color change and tried to feel something, tried to feel the guilt lifting, the stain dissolving, the weight being taken from his chest by the formal intervention of god and priest and king. He tried. He failed. The water was just water. The blood was just blood. The guilt was still there, sitting in his chest like a stone, unmoved by ceremony, indifferent to ritual, as permanent and as personal as his own heartbeat.</p>
<p>But the form mattered, even if the feeling did not follow. The form said: you are clean. The form said: the gods accept the exchange, blood for blood, the pig’s life for the debt of the man’s death. The form said: you may now eat and drink and sleep under a roof without contaminating those who share it with you. The form said: you are human again.</p>
<p>Third, the oath. Proetus placed his hands on Bellerophon’s head and spoke the words of absolution, the formal declaration that the blood-guilt was lifted and that Bellerophon was, in the eyes of gods and men, purified. The words were ancient, older than Argos, older than Greece, words that had been spoken over killers and warriors and accidental murderers since the time when language was first used to do the thing that language does best: impose order on chaos, draw lines around the shapeless darkness of human experience and say this is guilt, this is punishment, this is forgiveness, and this, finally, impossibly, miraculously, is a new beginning.</p>
<p>Bellerophon stood up. He was purified. He was clean. He was, according to every authority that mattered, free of his brother’s blood.</p>
<p>He did not feel free. But freedom, like so many things, is sometimes a matter of form before it becomes a matter of feeling, and form, at least, he had.</p>
<div class="section-break">
✦   ✦   ✦
</div>
<p>He stayed at the court of Argos. This was not unexpected; purification created a bond between purifier and purified, and it was customary for the supplicant to remain in the service of the king who had cleansed him, at least for a time. Bellerophon was given quarters in the palace, a small but comfortable room on the second floor with a window that overlooked the training yard, and he was incorporated into the household with the smooth efficiency of a court that was accustomed to absorbing strays.</p>
<p>He trained with the soldiers. He ate at the common table. He attended the evening gatherings in the great hall where the court assembled to drink wine and listen to the bard and engage in the elaborate social performances that constituted aristocratic entertainment in an age before theaters and amphitheaters had been invented. He was polite, reserved, competent. He did everything that was expected of him and nothing that was not. He was, in short, the perfect guest, which is to say, a person who gives no one any reason to notice him and thereby gives everyone a reason to notice him, because perfection, in any context, is suspicious.</p>
<p>The soldiers noticed him in the training yard. He was fast, faster than anyone they had seen, with reflexes that seemed to anticipate rather than react, as though his body knew what its opponent was going to do before the opponent had decided to do it. He was skilled with the javelin (of course he was; the javelin was his weapon, the weapon that had killed his brother, and he could not touch one without feeling the ghost of that throw in his arm, the trajectory burned into his muscle memory like a scar). He was an extraordinary horseman, the best in the palace and possibly the best in Argos, riding with a fluidity and a control that made the Argive cavalry officers, who considered themselves the finest riders in Greece, exchange glances of reluctant admiration.</p>
<p>The courtiers noticed him at dinner. He was quiet but not silent, reserved but not rude, with a dry, understated wit that emerged unexpectedly, like sunlight through clouds, and which was all the more effective for being rare. He had a way of listening that made the person speaking feel heard, truly heard, in a way that was both flattering and slightly unnerving, because to be heard is to be seen, and to be seen is to be known, and most people, if they are honest, do not actually want to be known. They want to be admired, which is a different thing entirely.</p>
<p>Stheneboea noticed him. She noticed him the way a hunter notices a stag at the edge of a clearing: with a sudden, focused intensity that is part aesthetic appreciation and part predatory calculation. She noticed the way he moved, the economy of it, the grace. She noticed the darkness in his eyes, which was not sadness exactly but something deeper, a quality of depth, of hidden spaces, of rooms that no one was allowed to enter. She noticed the way he held himself apart from the court, present but not participating, observed but not engaging, like a man standing at the edge of a fire, close enough to feel the warmth but not close enough to be burned.</p>
<p>She noticed, and she wanted, and the wanting was, for her, both a discovery and a confirmation. A discovery because she had not expected to want anyone (she was queen; she had a husband, a position, a palace; wanting was a luxury she had long since disciplined herself to renounce). A confirmation because, at some level deeper than conscious thought, she had always known that her renunciation was temporary, a dam built across a river that was only waiting for the right pressure to break through.</p>
<p>Bellerophon was the pressure.</p>
<p>She began to find reasons to be near him. She appeared at the training yard, ostensibly to observe the soldiers but in fact to watch Bellerophon throw javelins with an accuracy that was almost painful to witness. She sat beside him at dinner, maneuvering the seating with the subtle skill of a woman who understood the court’s social topography the way a general understands terrain. She asked him questions about Corinth, about his family, about his life before the exile, questions that were innocuous on the surface but designed, with careful precision, to open the doors he kept closed.</p>
<p>Bellerophon answered her questions. He was courteous, because he was a guest and she was the queen and courtesy was not merely a social convention but a survival strategy. But he did not open the doors. He gave her the versions of his answers that could be shared without cost, the surface facts, the public history, the carefully edited narrative of a life that had been extraordinary and was now, by his own choice, as ordinary as he could make it. He did not give her the real answers, the answers that lived behind the doors, the answers about his brother and his father and the horse in his dreams and the guilt that sat in his chest like a stone that no ritual could dissolve.</p>
<p>He did not give her these things because he could not afford to. Not because they were secrets (though they were; a man is made of his secrets the way a house is made of its walls, and to remove the secrets is to collapse the structure). But because giving them to her would create an intimacy that he could not sustain, an intimacy that would cross the line between guest and host, between supplicant and queen, between the permissible and the catastrophic. He had already caused one death by getting too close to someone he loved. He would not risk another.</p>
<p>And there was the matter of xenia, of guest-right, the sacred bond between host and guest that was guaranteed by Zeus himself and that was, in the moral architecture of the Greek world, the closest thing to an absolute law. A guest did not seduce his host’s wife. A guest did not even consider seducing his host’s wife. The punishment for violating xenia was not merely human retribution (though that would certainly follow, and swiftly) but divine wrath, the cold, systematic, inescapable fury of Zeus Xenios, who took the obligations of hospitality as personally as though he had invented them, which, in a sense, he had.</p>
<p>Bellerophon was already carrying one death. He would not add a sacrilege.</p>
<div class="section-break">
✦   ✦   ✦
</div>
<p>The moment came on an evening in late summer, when the air was thick and warm and smelled of jasmine and the court had been drinking longer than usual because the heat made sleep impossible and wine was, if not a solution, at least a distraction. The great hall was half-empty; most of the court had retreated to the cooler rooms of the lower palace, and only a handful of people remained, spread out in the shadows with their cups and their conversations, their voices blurred by wine and heat into a low, indistinct murmur.</p>
<p>Bellerophon was on the western terrace, alone, looking out over the plain of Argos. The plain was dark, a vast, flat expanse of cultivated land that stretched from the city walls to the distant mountains, and in the darkness it looked like a sea, featureless and immense, dotted here and there with the tiny orange lights of farmsteads that were still awake. The stars were out, thick and bright in the way that stars are bright only in places where there are no other lights to compete with them, and the Milky Way stretched overhead in a band of pale fire that looked, if you tilted your head and squinted, like a road leading upward into a country that no human foot had ever walked.</p>
<p>Stheneboea appeared beside him. She moved quietly, but not so quietly that he didn’t hear her; she wanted him to know she was there, wanted the approach itself to be a kind of communication, a declaration of intent that was more honest, in its way, than any words she could have spoken.</p>
<p>She stood close to him. Closer than protocol allowed. Close enough that he could feel the warmth of her body through the thin linen of her chiton, and smell the perfume she wore, something floral and resinous, like roses crushed in pine sap, a scent that was simultaneously natural and composed, like the woman herself.</p>
<p>“You can’t sleep either,” she said.</p>
<p>“No.”</p>
<p>“The heat?”</p>
<p>“The heat,” he agreed, though the heat was the least of the things keeping him awake.</p>
<p>She turned to face him. In the starlight, her features were softened, the sharp intelligence of her eyes replaced by something warmer, more vulnerable, and for a moment she looked not like a queen but like a woman, simply a woman, standing on a terrace in the dark with a man she wanted, and the wanting was so naked, so undisguised, so completely at odds with the careful, controlled persona she maintained during the day, that Bellerophon felt a pang of something that was not desire but was related to desire, the way a brother is related to a sister: recognition. He recognized her want because it mirrored something in himself, some deep, hungry part of him that had been starved since his brother’s death, the part that wanted to be touched, to be held, to be known by another person in the way that only physical intimacy can provide.</p>
<p>“Bellerophon,” she said, and the way she said his name, slowly, savoring it, as though the syllables themselves were something to be tasted, made the hairs on the back of his neck stand up. “I know what you are carrying. I can see it. The weight of it. The darkness.”</p>
<p>“My lady,” he said, and the formality was a shield, raised between them with the practiced speed of a soldier blocking a blow.</p>
<p>“Don’t,” she said. “Don’t ‘my lady’ me. Not here. Not now.” She reached out and touched his arm, just below the elbow, where the skin was bare, and the touch was light, barely there, but it went through him like lightning through water, a shock that was not entirely unpleasant but was absolutely, unmistakably dangerous. “You don’t have to carry it alone.”</p>
<p>“I do,” he said. “It’s mine to carry.”</p>
<p>“Let me help.”</p>
<p>“You can’t.”</p>
<p>“You don’t know that.”</p>
<p>“I do know that. And you know it too. What you’re offering isn’t help. It’s another kind of burden.”</p>
<p>He said it gently, or as gently as he could, because he was not cruel, not deliberately, not in the calculating way that cruelty requires. But the words were a refusal, and a refusal, however gently delivered, is still a wound, and Stheneboea, who was not accustomed to being refused (queens rarely are; the combination of power and beauty tends to eliminate the need for practice in the art of rejection), felt the wound keenly.</p>
<p>Her face changed. It was a small change, a tightening around the eyes, a compression of the lips, a subtle rearrangement of the muscles that transformed her expression from vulnerability to something else, something harder, something that was not anger exactly but was anger’s close cousin, the cold, precise, surgical fury of a person who has been made to feel foolish and who will not, under any circumstances, forgive the person who made them feel it.</p>
<p>“I see,” she said. Her voice was steady. Controlled. The warmth was gone, replaced by a formality that was, in its way, more frightening than any display of emotion would have been. “I apologize for the intrusion. Good night, Bellerophon.”</p>
<p>She left. Her footsteps on the stone terrace were precise, measured, the footsteps of a woman who was walking away from a humiliation and was determined to do it with dignity, which she did, because Stheneboea was, above all things, a woman who understood the importance of appearances.</p>
<p>Bellerophon stood on the terrace and listened to her footsteps fade and knew, with the certainty of a man who has just heard the first crack of ice on a frozen river, that something terrible was about to happen. He did not know what. He did not know when. But the crack was there, and the river was moving underneath, and the ice, which had seemed solid enough to walk on, was about to give way.</p>
<p>He thought about leaving. Simply walking out of the palace, out of Argos, into the night, as he had walked out of Corinth. But leaving would mean abandoning the protection of Proetus’s guest-right, and without that protection, he was nothing, a kinslayer without a patron, a man so polluted by blood that no house in Greece would take him in. Proetus’s purification was his shield, his legitimacy, his proof that the gods had accepted his repentance and restored him to the community of the clean. Without it, he was an outcast. With it, he was merely unfortunate.</p>
<p>He stayed. It was a reasonable decision, and a wrong one, and the difference between reasonable and right is the space in which most tragedies occur.</p>
<div class="section-break">
✦   ✦   ✦
</div>
<p>Stheneboea went to her husband the next morning. She went to him early, before the court was awake, while the palace was still quiet and the only sounds were the kitchen fires being lit and the distant clatter of the morning watch changing on the walls. She went to his chamber, which was separate from hers (this was not unusual in royal marriages; sleeping apart was a matter of practicality rather than estrangement, though in Proetus and Stheneboea’s case, the practical arrangement had long since become an emotional one). She went to him and she told him a story.</p>
<p>The story was this: Bellerophon, the Corinthian exile, the man Proetus had purified and taken into his household, had come to her room in the night. He had made advances. He had spoken to her of desire, of loneliness, of the need for comfort. He had touched her arm. He had moved closer. She had refused him, firmly, and he had left, but the violation of trust, the violation of xenia, the sheer, breathtaking arrogance of a guest who would attempt to seduce his host’s wife…</p>
<p>She told the story well. She told it with tears, which were real, though their cause was not what Proetus believed. She told it with the right mix of outrage and distress, the right amount of detail (enough to be convincing, not so much as to seem rehearsed), the right pauses, the right silences, the right moments of apparent difficulty where she seemed to struggle with the humiliation of the telling. She was, in this performance, magnificent, and it was a performance, though that does not mean it was entirely false. The best performances never are. They are the truth, rearranged, with the actors and the actions transposed, so that the woman who wanted becomes the woman who was wanted, and the man who refused becomes the man who pursued, and the whole scene, which was in reality a collision between loneliness and integrity, becomes, in the retelling, a collision between innocence and predation.</p>
<p>Proetus listened. His face, which was not a face built for subtlety, went through a series of changes that Stheneboea observed with the careful attention of a woman who needed to know, at each moment, whether her story was being believed. First, confusion. Then anger. Then a deeper anger, the slow, hot, building anger of a man who has been betrayed by someone he trusted, someone he had taken into his house and purified and fed and treated as a son. Then something else, something quieter and more dangerous: calculation.</p>
<p>Because Proetus was not a fool. He was not a subtle man, and he was not an imaginative man, but he was a practical man, and practical men, when confronted with a crisis, do not waste time on emotion; they proceed directly to logistics. And the logistics of this situation were clear and deeply inconvenient.</p>
<p>He could not kill Bellerophon. Not here. Not under his own roof. Bellerophon was his guest, bound to him by the sacred laws of xenia, and those laws worked in both directions: the guest must not harm the host, but the host must not harm the guest, and the penalty for violation, in either direction, was the wrath of Zeus. Proetus had invoked Zeus Xenios in his formal welcome of Bellerophon. He had spoken the words. The bond was made. To break it now, to kill a man he had formally received as a guest, would be an act of such impiety that the consequences would extend beyond his own life and into the lives of his children and his children’s children, a curse that would follow his bloodline like a shadow, generation after generation, until the debt was paid.</p>
<p>He could not kill Bellerophon. But he could not let the offense go unanswered. His wife had been insulted. His honor had been challenged. His hospitality had been abused. These were things that a king could not ignore, because a king who ignored them was not a king but a spectator, a man sitting on a throne watching his own authority dissolve like salt in water.</p>
<p>He needed a solution that satisfied honor without violating xenia. He needed to punish Bellerophon without killing him. He needed, in short, to make someone else do the killing.</p>
<p>And it was here, in the quiet of his chamber, with his wife’s tears still fresh on her cheeks and the early-morning light coming through the window and catching the dust motes in the air, that Proetus had an idea. It was not a kind idea. It was not, by any measure, a noble idea. But it was a practical idea, and Proetus was a practical man, and practical men, when their backs are against the wall, will do practical things, and call them justice, and sleep soundly afterward.</p>
<p>He would write a letter.</p>
<p>He would send Bellerophon to Lycia.</p>
<p>He would send Bellerophon to his father-in-law, King Iobates, with a letter that said, in the secret script that only the royal houses used and that Bellerophon, a Corinthian prince with no training in Argive or Lycian writing, would not be able to read: “Kill the bearer of this message.”</p>
<p>It was elegant. It was practical. It was, in every way that mattered, murder by proxy, and the blood would be on someone else’s hands, and the guest-right would be technically unbroken, and Zeus Xenios would have no cause for complaint, because the killing would happen in Lycia, under a different roof, by a different hand, and the letter would be the only connection between the command and the act, and letters, unlike gods, do not testify.</p>
<p>Proetus smiled. It was not a pleasant smile. It was the smile of a man who has found a loophole in the laws of heaven and intends to use it.</p>
<p>“Dry your tears, my dear,” he said to Stheneboea. “The matter will be handled.”</p>
<p>And Stheneboea, who had gotten exactly what she wanted and was already beginning to wonder, in the deepest and most private chamber of her heart, whether what she wanted was the same as what she needed, dried her tears and went back to her room and sat on her bed and stared at the wall and felt, beneath the satisfaction of revenge, the first faint stirrings of something that might, if she were honest enough to name it (and she was not, not yet, not for years), have been called regret.</p>
</div>
<div class="chapter">
<div class="chapter-header">
<span class="chapter-label">— Chapter Four —</span>
<section id="the-sealed-letter" class="level2 chapter-title">
<h2 class="chapter-title">The Sealed Letter</h2>
</section>
</div>
<p>Proetus summoned Bellerophon the following morning. The summons came through a servant, a thin, expressionless man who appeared at Bellerophon’s door with the particular blank efficiency of someone who has been instructed to reveal nothing, and who took to the instruction with a natural aptitude that suggested he had been revealing nothing his entire life. The king wished to see him. At his convenience, of course, though the “of course” was delivered with the kind of inflection that made clear that convenience was not, in fact, a factor, and that the king wished to see him now, and that the difference between a summons and an invitation was largely a matter of whether you were allowed to say no.</p>
<p>Bellerophon dressed quickly. He had slept badly, which was not unusual (he had slept badly every night since his brother’s death, his sleep visited by dreams that were sometimes about the white horse and sometimes about the ravine and sometimes about a darkness so complete and so total that it had no content at all, merely the sensation of being swallowed by something enormous and patient and utterly without mercy). The morning light was sharp and pale, and the palace was already busy with the sounds of a household coming to life: voices, footsteps, the clatter of crockery, the distant barking of dogs in the kennel yard.</p>
<p>He found Proetus in his private chamber, a small, austere room at the back of the palace that served as the king’s study and retreat. It was a room that reflected its owner: plain, solid, functional, with none of the decorative excess that characterized the public spaces of the palace. There was a desk (a heavy wooden table, really, scarred with the marks of decades of administrative abuse), a chair, a shelf of clay tablets and papyrus scrolls, and a window that looked out onto an interior courtyard where a fig tree, ancient and gnarled, was slowly and methodically cracking the paving stones with its roots.</p>
<p>Proetus was seated at the desk. Before him lay a folded tablet of wax and wood, the standard medium for private correspondence in the Greek world: two thin boards of beech, hinged along one edge, their inner surfaces coated with a layer of dark wax into which a message could be inscribed with a stylus and then sealed shut with cord and a clay or wax seal, rendering the contents invisible to anyone who did not break the seal. The tablet was closed. A cord of linen thread wound around it in the prescribed pattern, and a seal of red wax, stamped with the signet of the royal house of Argos (a lion’s head in profile, its mouth open, its mane stylized into a pattern of concentric curves), secured the binding.</p>
<p>Proetus looked up when Bellerophon entered. His expression was neutral, carefully neutral, the kind of studied blankness that is, in its way, more revealing than any display of emotion, because the effort required to maintain it is visible to anyone who knows where to look. Bellerophon knew where to look. He had grown up in the court of Sisyphus’s heir, where reading faces was a survival skill, and he could see, behind the mask of neutrality, the subtle markers of a man who had made a decision that he was not entirely comfortable with but was going to carry out regardless.</p>
<p>“Bellerophon,” Proetus said. “Please. Sit.”</p>
<p>There was no second chair, which was either an oversight or a statement. Bellerophon remained standing.</p>
<p>“I have a task for you,” Proetus continued. “A mission, of a sort. My father-in-law, Iobates, King of Lycia, has sent word that he requires a skilled warrior for a matter of some importance. I have spoken of your abilities to him in my correspondence, and he has expressed an interest in meeting you.”</p>
<p>This was a lie, and Bellerophon, with the instinct that was both his gift and his inheritance, sensed it. Not the content of the lie (he had no way of knowing whether Proetus had or had not corresponded with Iobates about him), but the texture of it, the way the words sat in Proetus’s mouth like something that didn’t quite fit, something that had been shaped and smoothed and made to look natural but that was, at its core, manufactured. Proetus was not a natural liar. He was a man of action, of directness, of the straightforward application of force, and lying required a flexibility of mind and a comfort with ambiguity that he did not naturally possess. He was doing it because he had to, and the effort showed.</p>
<p>But Bellerophon said nothing about the lie, because saying something would require evidence, and he had none, only instinct, and instinct, however accurate, is not admissible in the courts of kings. Instead, he asked: “What is the mission?”</p>
<p>“Iobates will explain when you arrive. I have prepared a letter of introduction.” Proetus gestured toward the sealed tablet on the desk. “You will carry this to him. Present it upon your arrival. It contains my recommendation and the details of the arrangement.”</p>
<p>Bellerophon looked at the tablet. It was an ordinary object, a thing he had seen a hundred times in Corinthian and Argive courts, the standard vehicle for diplomatic communication. There was nothing remarkable about it. It was wood and wax and thread and a stamp of red clay, no different from the dozens of similar tablets that passed between kings and merchants and officials every day, carrying the routine business of the world from one place to another.</p>
<p>And yet.</p>
<p>There was something about the way Proetus held himself, the way his eyes moved from the tablet to Bellerophon and back, the way his fingers, resting on the desk, were not quite still, that gave Bellerophon a feeling he had learned, through painful experience, to trust: the feeling that the surface of the situation and the truth of the situation were not the same thing. That the tablet was not merely a letter of introduction. That the mission was not merely a favor to a father-in-law. That something was being communicated that he was not meant to understand, a message whose meaning was sealed as surely as the wax that held the tablet closed.</p>
<p>He thought about refusing. He thought about asking questions, probing, pressing, using the analytical skills that Sisyphus’s blood had given him to peel back the layers of Proetus’s deception and find the truth underneath. He thought about the queen, and her visit to his terrace, and her tears, and the look in her eyes when she left, the cold, precise fury of a woman who had been refused.</p>
<p>And he understood. Not everything, not the specifics, but the shape of it, the architecture of what was happening: Stheneboea had told Proetus something. Something that reversed the truth, that made the pursuer into the pursued and the refuser into the aggressor. And Proetus, bound by xenia from acting directly, was doing the next best thing. He was sending Bellerophon away, with a letter that was not what it appeared to be, to a destination from which he was probably not expected to return.</p>
<p>This understanding took approximately three seconds. It passed through Bellerophon’s mind like a cold wind through an open window, and it left behind it a landscape of options that were all, in their various ways, inadequate. He could confront Proetus. He could deny whatever Stheneboea had said. He could explain the truth, describe the terrace, describe the queen’s approach, describe his refusal. But he would be accusing the queen of lying, and a guest who accuses his host’s wife of lying is a guest who has violated the spirit of xenia even if he has observed the letter, and the result would be the same: expulsion, dishonor, exile without the protection that Proetus’s purification had given him.</p>
<p>Or he could take the tablet and go.</p>
<p>He took the tablet. It was heavier than he expected, or perhaps it merely felt heavy, burdened with the weight of whatever words were scratched into the wax inside it, words that he could not read, words that were about him, words that might be (he was almost certain were) his own death sentence, sealed and signed and handed to him with a king’s smile and a king’s lie and the calm, practical efficiency of a man who had found a way to murder someone without getting blood on his hands.</p>
<p>“When should I depart?” Bellerophon asked.</p>
<p>“Tomorrow. A ship leaves for Lycia from the port of Nauplia at dawn.”</p>
<p>“I’ll be on it.”</p>
<p>Proetus nodded. There was, for a moment, something in his eyes that might have been guilt, or might have been pity, or might simply have been the discomfort of a man who is doing a thing he knows to be wrong and is aware, in the way that all men are aware, that the gods see what men see and more. But the moment passed, and the mask of neutrality returned, and Proetus said “Thank you, Bellerophon,” and Bellerophon said “My lord,” and the exchange was over, and the sentence was delivered, and the condemned man walked out of the room carrying his own execution order in his hands.</p>
<div class="section-break">
✦   ✦   ✦
</div>
<p>The port of Nauplia was an hour’s walk from Argos, down through the olive groves and the cultivated fields of the Argive plain, past the Mycenaean walls of Tiryns (which were, if anything, even more massive than the walls of Argos, the stones fitted so tightly that you could not slide a knife blade between them), and along a dusty road that ended at the edge of the sea. The port was small, a crescent of pebbly beach sheltered by a rocky headland, with a stone quay that jutted out into the water and a handful of warehouses and taverns that served the needs of the sailors and merchants who passed through.</p>
<p>The ship was a merchant vessel, broad-beamed and low in the water, loaded with amphorae of Argive wine and bales of Argive wool, bound for the ports of the Lycian coast. It was not a warship, not a sleek penteconter built for speed and combat, but a working boat, a phortegos, designed to carry cargo and passengers across the eastern Mediterranean with a minimum of fuss and a maximum of profit. Its captain was a stocky, sun-blackened man named Ariston, who had the cheerful cynicism of a person who has spent his life on the sea and has learned that the sea, unlike people, is at least honest about its intentions to kill you.</p>
<p>Bellerophon boarded at dawn. The sea was calm, a flat, grey-green expanse that reflected the early sky with the passive fidelity of a mirror. The oarsmen took their positions, twelve to a side, and the ship moved out of the harbor with the slow, heavy grace of a large animal entering water, the oars biting the surface in a rhythm that was almost musical, a deep, regular pulse that would continue, hour after hour, until the wind picked up and the sail could be unfurled.</p>
<p>He sat in the stern, on a coil of rope, with the sealed tablet in a leather bag at his feet. The coastline of the Peloponnese slid past on his left, a succession of coves and headlands and rocky beaches that looked, from the sea, like the teeth of an enormous jaw closing on the land. Behind him, Argos was already invisible, hidden behind the hills, and ahead of him, somewhere beyond the curve of the world, Lycia waited, a country he had never seen, ruled by a king he had never met, to whom he was carrying a message he could not read.</p>
<p>The irony of the situation was not lost on him. Here he was, the grandson of Sisyphus, the cleverest man who had ever lived, and he was carrying his own death sentence across the sea like a courier, delivering the instrument of his destruction with the dutiful efficiency of a servant running an errand. Sisyphus would have laughed. Sisyphus would have broken the seal, read the message, thrown the tablet into the sea, and invented an elaborate deception to explain its absence. Sisyphus would have outwitted Proetus the way he had outwitted Thanatos and Persephone and every other authority that had tried to constrain him.</p>
<p>But Bellerophon was not Sisyphus. This was the crucial difference, the distinction that would define his life and determine his fate: Bellerophon had his grandfather’s mind but not his grandfather’s morality. He could see the deception, could sense the trap, could feel the jaws closing around him. But he would not break the seal, because the seal was not his to break. The letter was entrusted to him, and a man who breaks a trust, even a trust that has been placed in him dishonestly, becomes the thing he is accused of being. If the letter said “Kill this man,” then breaking the seal and running would prove that he was the kind of man who could not be trusted, the kind of man who would violate xenia, the kind of man who deserved to be killed. And if the letter was innocent, if his suspicions were wrong (they were not wrong; he knew they were not wrong; but the possibility had to be acknowledged, because a man who acts on suspicion alone is a man who has already judged the world guilty and is merely looking for evidence to confirm the verdict), then breaking the seal would be a betrayal of the man who had purified him, and betrayal, however well-justified, has consequences that extend beyond the moment.</p>
<p>So he carried the letter. He carried it across the open sea, day after day, sitting in the stern of the merchant ship with his own doom in a leather bag at his feet, and the sea was blue, and the sun was hot, and the wind filled the square sail and drove the ship eastward, toward Lycia, toward a king he did not know, toward a fate he could not read but could feel, the way you feel the ground shifting beneath you before the earthquake comes.</p>
<div class="section-break">
✦   ✦   ✦
</div>
<p>The crossing took seven days. Seven days of open water, of the slow, hypnotic rhythm of the oars, of the creak of timber and the slap of wave against hull and the constant, omnipresent smell of salt and tar and the particular unwashed sweetness of twenty-four men living in close quarters on a small boat. Seven days of thinking, which was both a luxury and a torture, because Bellerophon’s mind, when left to its own devices, was not a restful place.</p>
<p>He thought about Deliades. He thought about the ravine and the boar and the javelin that had passed through one and into the other, and he replayed the moment, as he had replayed it every day since it happened, trying to find the instant where a different choice might have produced a different outcome. Could he have thrown later? Could he have thrown higher? Could he have not thrown at all and let the boar do its work and then killed it after, when it was no longer standing over his brother? But the boar was killing Deliades, the tusk was in his thigh, the blood was coming, and to wait would have been to let his brother die without trying to save him, and that, surely, was worse than what he had actually done, which was to try and fail.</p>
<p>Unless, some dark voice whispered from the lowest room of his mind, you didn’t fail. Unless the javelin went exactly where you meant it to go, and the part of you that threw it knew, in the instant of the throw, that the boar was not the only target. Unless the too-muchness, the Sisyphean excess, the thing in your blood that believes the rules don’t apply, looked at your brother pinned by the boar and saw not a person to be saved but an obstacle to be removed, and acted accordingly, and told the rest of you that it was an accident, and the rest of you believed it because the alternative was unbearable.</p>
<p>This was the thought that lived in the locked room. This was the thought that woke him in the dark and sat on his chest like a stone and whispered, with the quiet persistence of dripping water, the question that could never be answered, because the only person who truly knew the answer was the person asking the question, and that person could not be trusted, because that person was the one who had thrown the javelin.</p>
<p>Did he mean to do it?</p>
<p>He did not know. He would never know. This was his punishment, not the exile, not the name, not the letter in the bag at his feet, but this: the eternal uncertainty, the impossibility of ever being sure of his own innocence, the locked room that could never be opened because the opening itself would destroy whatever truth was inside. He was Sisyphus with his boulder. He was his grandfather’s heir after all, condemned to push the same question up the same hill forever, and every time he thought he had reached the top, every time he thought he had finally, definitively answered it (it was an accident; I did not mean it; the javelin went where I aimed it, at the boar, only at the boar), the question rolled back down, and he started again.</p>
<p>The sea, at least, was indifferent to his torment. The sea did not care about guilt or innocence, about brothers or boulders or sealed letters. The sea had its own agenda, which involved tides and currents and the feeding habits of fish and the slow, geological processes of erosion and deposition that would, given enough time, reshape the coastlines of the world as casually as a potter reshapes clay. The sea was the oldest thing Bellerophon had ever encountered, older than Argos, older than Corinth, older than the gods themselves (the gods had been born; the sea had always been), and in its presence, his human drama felt small, not insignificant but small, a single note in a symphony so vast that no ear could hear all of it at once.</p>
<p>This was, oddly, comforting. The smallness was a relief. For a few hours each day, watching the waves and the light and the distant line of the horizon where the sky met the water in a seam so fine it was invisible, Bellerophon could set down the boulder and just exist, without question, without guilt, without the grinding internal machinery of self-examination. He could be a man on a boat, going somewhere, for a reason that was not entirely clear, and the not-knowing was a space he could rest in, the way a traveler rests in the shade of a tree without asking the tree to explain itself.</p>
<p>The crew left him alone, mostly. Sailors are practical people, not given to curiosity about their passengers, and Bellerophon, who did not invite conversation but did not refuse it, occupied a comfortable middle ground between welcome and unwelcome that allowed him to pass through the days without friction. Captain Ariston asked him, once, what his business in Lycia was, and Bellerophon said “I carry a letter for King Iobates,” which was true and which Ariston accepted with a shrug that communicated, with admirable economy, the full range of a professional sailor’s indifference to the personal affairs of his cargo.</p>
<div class="section-break">
✦   ✦   ✦
</div>
<p>On the fifth day, they passed the island of Rhodes. It rose from the sea like a green-brown fist, its mountains wreathed in cloud, its coastline fringed with white surf. Bellerophon watched it pass and thought about the stories he had heard of the island: the Colossus that would one day stand at the entrance to its harbor (though that was generations away and existed, at this point, only as a local ambition that most visitors found charmingly unrealistic), the schools of philosophy, the famous Rhodian slingers whose accuracy with their weapons was legendary and whose wages, consequently, were extortionate. He thought about stopping there, about getting off the ship, about beginning a new life on an island where no one knew him and the letter in his bag would never reach its destination.</p>
<p>He did not stop. He did not get off the ship. He sat in the stern and watched Rhodes shrink behind him and thought about the fact that he was, in all probability, sailing toward his own death, and he did nothing to prevent it, and the doing-nothing was not passivity or resignation but something else, something harder to name: a kind of faith, perhaps, or a kind of defiance, or a kind of the same too-muchness that had driven his grandfather to challenge the gods, only turned inward instead of outward, directed not at the world but at himself, at the locked room and the unanswered question and the possibility, which he could not entirely dismiss, that he deserved whatever was waiting for him in Lycia.</p>
<p>If the gods wanted him dead, they could arrange it. If they did not, no sealed letter would kill him. Either way, the outcome was not in his hands, and the recognition of this, the surrender of control to forces larger than himself, was, if not peace, at least its distant cousin.</p>
<p>The sea carried him east. The sun set behind him each evening in a blaze of orange and red, as though the western sky were on fire, and each morning the sun rose ahead of him, a pale disk emerging from the water like a coin dropped in reverse, and between sunset and sunrise the stars came out, thick and bright and ancient, and Bellerophon lay on the deck and looked up at them and thought about his brother, who had said, once, on a terrace in Corinth, “I just want to be happy,” and who had not lived long enough to find out whether happiness was possible or merely theoretical.</p>
<p>On the seventh day, the mountains of Lycia appeared on the horizon. They were not like Greek mountains; they were taller, wilder, more rugged, their peaks white with snow even in summer, their slopes dark with cedar and pine that grew so thick the trees looked, from the sea, like fur on the back of a massive animal. The coastline was dramatic, a series of towering cliffs and narrow inlets and hidden coves where the water was so clear and so blue that it seemed to generate its own light, as though the sea were a lamp and the rocks were the shade.</p>
<p>Captain Ariston brought the ship into a harbor at the mouth of the river Xanthus, a wide, brown-green river that flowed down from the mountains and emptied into the sea through a broad, marshy delta where herons stood in the shallows and the air smelled of mud and salt and the particular vegetal sweetness of river water mixing with seawater. The harbor was busy; Lycia was a trading nation, though not in the Corinthian mold (Lycians traded not in goods but in services, primarily mercenary soldiers and sailors, who were, by universal consensus, the finest in the eastern Mediterranean, and who fought for whoever paid them with a professional indifference to the politics of their employers that was either admirable or terrifying, depending on whether they were fighting for you or against you).</p>
<p>Bellerophon disembarked. He stood on the dock with his bag at his feet and the sealed letter in his hand and looked up at the mountains, and the mountains looked back at him with the blank, enormous patience of things that have been standing since before the gods were born and will be standing long after the gods are forgotten, and Bellerophon thought: this is where it happens. Whatever “it” is. This is where the letter opens and the words come out and the sentence is passed and the future, which has been sealed shut like a wax tablet, is finally read.</p>
<p>He asked directions to the palace of Iobates. The directions were given by a fisherman who was mending nets on the dock and who pointed, with a fish-scaled hand, up the river, toward the mountains. “Follow the Xanthus,” the fisherman said. “Half a day’s walk. You can’t miss it.”</p>
<p>Bellerophon followed the Xanthus. The river was wide and slow, moving through a flat, fertile valley that was cultivated with wheat and barley and grapevines, and the road that ran alongside it was good, well-maintained, the kind of road that told you that the government that built it was competent and prosperous and took its infrastructure seriously. The farmsteads along the road were neat and well-kept, their walls whitewashed, their fields carefully tended, and the people he passed, farmers and laborers and women carrying water jugs, looked healthy and well-fed and not particularly frightened, which told him more about the quality of Iobates’s rule than any report or reputation could have.</p>
<p>The palace appeared in the late afternoon, as the sun was beginning its descent behind the western mountains. It was built on a natural terrace above the river, a broad, flat shelf of rock that gave it a commanding view of the valley below and the mountains above. It was larger than Bellerophon had expected, not a fortress like Argos or a commercial palace like Corinth but something in between, a complex of stone buildings arranged around a series of courtyards, each flowing into the next, with fountains and gardens and covered walkways that gave the whole place an atmosphere of civilized ease that was quite different from the heavy, martial formality of Proetus’s court.</p>
<p>Guards met him at the outer gate. He stated his name and his business. The guards sent a runner. The runner returned with an official, a tall man in a linen robe who introduced himself as the king’s steward and who examined Bellerophon with the practiced eye of a man whose job it was to assess visitors and who had developed, over years of practice, the ability to form an accurate judgment of a person’s character, status, and intentions in approximately the time it took to draw a breath.</p>
<p>The steward’s assessment, whatever it was, apparently passed muster. Bellerophon was admitted. He was led through the outer courtyard, past the fountains and the gardens, into the guest quarters, a suite of rooms that were small but beautifully appointed, with whitewashed walls, a bed with linen sheets, a table with a jug of water and a bowl of figs, and a window that framed, like a painting, a view of the river valley with the mountains beyond.</p>
<p>“The king will receive you tomorrow,” the steward said. “Tonight, you are invited to dine in the great hall. The king’s hospitality is extended to you for as long as you remain in his house.”</p>
<p>Guest-right. Again. The sacred bond, invoked again, by a different king, in a different country, over a man who had already been protected by one invocation and betrayed by the same. Bellerophon felt the irony of it settle over him like a garment, a second skin of absurdity that he could not remove. He was a guest. He was protected. He was carrying a letter that probably asked for his death. And the man who would read the letter would, by the time he read it, be bound by the same laws of hospitality that prevented him from acting on its contents.</p>
<p>It was, if you stepped back far enough to see the pattern, almost funny. Almost.</p>
<p>Bellerophon set the sealed letter on the table beside the figs. He looked at it. It sat there, inert, innocent, a small wooden tablet with a linen cord and a wax seal, no different from a thousand other tablets carrying a thousand other messages across a thousand other seas. It told him nothing. It showed him nothing. It was a closed door, a sealed room, a question without an answer, and inside it, scratched into the dark wax in characters he could not read, was the shape of his future, which might be death and might be life and was, at this moment, as unknowable as the mind of a god.</p>
<p>He left the letter on the table. He washed his face and hands in the water jug. He changed into the clean chiton that had been left for him (linen, good quality, the Lycian color of deep blue). And he went to dinner, because that was what guests did, and he was a guest, and the form mattered, even when (especially when) the content was a lie.</p>
<p>Tomorrow, Iobates would read the letter. Tomorrow, the sealed room would be opened, and the truth would come out, and the future would stop being a question and start being an answer.</p>
<p>But tonight, there was dinner. There was wine. There was the warm, human ritual of eating together, of sharing food and stories and the brief, precious, entirely fragile illusion that the world is a safe place and the people in it can be trusted.</p>
<p>Bellerophon went to dinner. He ate. He drank. He was, for one more evening, alive, and the letter on the table in his room waited, patient and sealed and full of words he could not read, for the morning that would change everything.</p>
</div>
<div class="chapter">
<div class="chapter-header">
<span class="chapter-label">— Chapter Five —</span>
<section id="nine-days-of-feasting" class="level2 chapter-title">
<h2 class="chapter-title">Nine Days of Feasting</h2>
</section>
</div>
<p>King Iobates did not read the letter on the first day, or the second, or the third. He did not read it because he was a good host, and a good host, in the Lycian tradition, does not conduct business with a guest until the guest has been properly welcomed, and proper welcoming, in the Lycian tradition, was a process that could not be hurried any more than the aging of wine or the rising of bread. There were customs to be observed. There were protocols to be followed. There were nine days of hospitality to be offered, nine days of food and wine and conversation and the slow, deliberate cultivation of the bond between host and guest that was, in Lycian culture, considered not merely a social obligation but a sacred act, an expression of the fundamental human truth that strangers are simply friends you haven’t fed yet.</p>
<p>This is not to say that Iobates was unaware of the letter. He was aware of it. He had noted it when Bellerophon presented it on the first evening, a sealed tablet bearing the signet of Proetus, his son-in-law, and he had accepted it with the courteous gravity appropriate to diplomatic correspondence, and he had set it aside, and he had not opened it, and the not-opening was not indifference or forgetfulness but the strict observance of a custom that was older than his throne and more binding than his law.</p>
<p>Nine days. It was always nine days. Nine was a number of completion, of fullness, of the cycle reaching its natural endpoint. The Lycians feasted for nine days because nine was the number of the Muses, and hospitality was an art, and art required its full measure of devotion. Or because nine was the number of months a child spent in the womb, and welcoming a guest was a kind of birth, the creation of a new relationship, a new obligation, a new life within the life of the household. Or because nine days was simply enough time to feed a man, get him drunk, hear his stories, assess his character, and decide whether you liked him, which was, when you stripped away the religious and philosophical justifications, the actual purpose of the exercise.</p>
<p>Iobates liked Bellerophon. This was inconvenient, as things turned out, but it was also genuine, the kind of liking that is based not on shared interests or mutual benefit but on the more fundamental and less rational foundation of temperamental compatibility. Iobates was a man who valued competence, and Bellerophon was competent. Iobates respected intelligence, and Bellerophon was intelligent. Iobates admired, with the particular admiration of a man who had spent his life in public service, the quality of self-containment, the ability to keep one’s counsel, to hold one’s peace, to speak only when speaking added something to the silence, and Bellerophon had this quality in abundance, having learned, through circumstances that were tragic rather than philosophical, that silence was often the wisest, safest, and most dignified response to a world that seemed determined to destroy him.</p>
<p>They dined together every evening in the great hall of the Lycian palace, a room that was, in Bellerophon’s estimation, one of the most beautiful he had ever seen. The hall was long and high-ceilinged, its walls painted with scenes of the Lycian countryside: mountains, rivers, forests of cedar, the sea crashing against the rocky coast. The colors were not the dark, heavy pigments of Argive frescoes but something lighter, brighter, more alive, blues and greens and golds that seemed to breathe and shift in the lamplight, as though the painted landscapes were windows into a world that existed just behind the walls. The floor was polished stone, dark and smooth, and the tables were arranged in the Lycian fashion, in a great horseshoe with the king’s table at the apex, so that everyone could see everyone else and conversations could flow freely around the room, pooling and eddying like water finding its level.</p>
<p>The food was extraordinary. Bellerophon, who had grown up in Corinth, where the cuisine was good but limited by the city’s position on a rocky isthmus (excellent fish; acceptable bread; very good wine; everything else, mediocre), was not prepared for the abundance and variety of a Lycian table. There was lamb, roasted whole on spits over beds of aromatic wood, the fat crackling and spitting, the meat falling off the bone in long, pink shreds that melted on the tongue. There was fish from the river Xanthus, baked in clay with herbs that Bellerophon could not identify but that tasted of sunlight and wild places. There were vegetables he had never seen before, roasted roots and steamed greens and a purple fruit, fleshy and slightly sweet, that the Lycians ate with cheese and honey. There was bread, dark and dense, studded with seeds and served with olive oil that was green-gold and peppery and so different from Corinthian olive oil that it might have come from a different planet.</p>
<p>And there was wine. Lycian wine was famous, and it deserved to be. It was darker than Greek wine, deeper in color and flavor, with a complexity that unfolded on the palate like a story being told, each sip revealing a new layer, a new note, a new depth. Iobates drank it with the appreciative moderation of a man who understood that wine was a gift from the gods and that, like all divine gifts, it could bless or destroy depending on how it was handled. Bellerophon drank it with the careful restraint of a man who knew that his situation was precarious and that a loose tongue could be as fatal as a drawn sword.</p>
<p>They talked. This was, perhaps, the most dangerous part of the nine days, because talk, unlike wine or food, cannot be moderated by quantity alone; it is the quality of talk, the depth of it, the direction it takes, that determines whether a conversation is safe or perilous, and Iobates, who was a skilled conversationalist with a genuine curiosity about the world and the people in it, had a way of steering conversations toward depths that Bellerophon would have preferred to avoid.</p>
<div class="section-break">
✦   ✦   ✦
</div>
<p>On the third evening, Iobates asked about Corinth.</p>
<p>“I have never been,” the king said, leaning back in his chair with the relaxed authority of a man who is comfortable in his own hall and in his own skin. He was older than Proetus, perhaps sixty, with a face that was heavily lined but still strong, the kind of face that has been shaped by decades of weather and responsibility into something that is not handsome but is better than handsome: it is trustworthy. His hair was white, cut short in the Lycian style, and his beard was white as well, trimmed close, and his eyes were dark and very bright, the eyes of a man who has seen a great deal and has chosen, after careful consideration, to remain interested in what he sees. “Tell me about it. Is it true that you can see two seas from the top of the mountain?”</p>
<p>“Three, on a clear day,” Bellerophon said. “The Saronic Gulf, the Gulf of Corinth, and, if you look north past the Megarian hills, the strait that leads to the Euboean Sea. Though that last one may be wishful thinking. The priests claim it, but priests claim many things.”</p>
<p>Iobates laughed. He had a good laugh, deep and genuine, the laugh of a man who finds the world amusing and does not feel the need to apologize for it. “And the temple of Aphrodite? The one at the summit? Is it true what they say about the priestesses?”</p>
<p>“That depends on what they say.”</p>
<p>“That there are a thousand of them, and that their worship involves… shall we say, a very personal form of devotion to the goddess.”</p>
<p>“The number is exaggerated,” Bellerophon said. “The rest is roughly accurate, though I think ‘worship’ is a generous description of what happens up there. ‘Commerce’ might be closer to the truth.”</p>
<p>Iobates laughed again. “You are very direct, for a Corinthian. I was given to understand that Corinthians never say anything plainly.”</p>
<p>“That is a Corinthian trait, yes. I seem to have inherited a different set of traits.”</p>
<p>“From your grandfather, perhaps?”</p>
<p>The question was light, casual, tossed out with the easy confidence of a man making conversation. But Bellerophon heard the sharpness beneath it, the probe, the testing of a boundary, and he recognized it for what it was: Iobates was a kind man, but he was also a king, and kings, however kind, are always gathering information, always assessing, always building a picture of the person in front of them that is more detailed and more accurate than the picture the person is trying to present.</p>
<p>“From my grandfather,” Bellerophon agreed. “Among other sources.”</p>
<p>“Sisyphus was a remarkable man.”</p>
<p>“Sisyphus was a cautionary tale.”</p>
<p>“Can a man not be both?”</p>
<p>“A man can be anything,” Bellerophon said. “That is both the gift and the problem.”</p>
<p>Iobates looked at him for a long moment, and in his dark, bright eyes there was an expression that Bellerophon had not seen directed at him since his brother’s death: respect. Not the cautious, qualified respect of a king for a visitor, but genuine respect, the recognition of a quality, a depth, a seriousness that was rare in young men and that Iobates, who had been young himself once and had not, by his own admission, been particularly serious about it, valued precisely because he understood how much it cost.</p>
<p>“You are an interesting young man, Bellerophon,” the king said. “I am glad you have come to my house.”</p>
<p>And Bellerophon, who was sitting at the table of a man who would, in six days’ time, read a letter asking for his death, felt a warmth spread through his chest that was partly the wine and partly the food and partly the simple, devastating power of being seen by someone who was not afraid of what they saw.</p>
<div class="section-break">
✦   ✦   ✦
</div>
<p>The days passed. Each one followed the same basic pattern: mornings in the training yards, where Bellerophon worked with the Lycian soldiers and earned, through quiet competence and a willingness to learn their techniques (which were different from Greek techniques in ways that were sometimes subtle and sometimes dramatic), a grudging and then genuine acceptance from men who were, by nature and training, suspicious of foreigners. Afternoons in the palace, resting, or walking in the gardens, or sitting by the river watching the brown water move south toward the sea. Evenings at the feast, eating and drinking and talking with Iobates, who was, Bellerophon was forced to acknowledge, one of the most genuinely decent human beings he had ever met.</p>
<p>This was the cruelty of the situation, the particular, exquisite cruelty that the gods, with their infinite capacity for dramatic irony, had arranged: Bellerophon was being given, for nine days, the thing he needed most in the world, the thing that his exile and his guilt and his blood-stained history had denied him. He was being given kindness. He was being given a place at a table and a voice in a conversation and a bed in a house where the sheets were clean and the food was good and the host was genuine and the welcome was real. He was being given, for nine brief days, the experience of being a human being among human beings, valued for what he was rather than defined by what he had done.</p>
<p>And at the end of those nine days, the man who had given him all of this would read a letter that asked for his death.</p>
<p>Bellerophon knew this. He was almost certain of it. The certainty sat in his stomach like a cold stone, present at every meal, present at every conversation, present in every moment of warmth and laughter and human connection, a constant reminder that everything he was experiencing was temporary, borrowed, a reprieve rather than a pardon. He was a man on the gallows enjoying the view. He was a prisoner savoring his last meal. He was, in the grand tradition of his family, a man who was trying to enjoy life while death sat patiently in the corner, waiting for its appointment.</p>
<p>On the fifth evening, Iobates asked about his brother.</p>
<p>He did not ask directly. He was too skillful for that, too kind, too aware of the protocols of grief and guilt that governed the discussion of painful subjects. He asked obliquely, through a story of his own, a story about a brother he had lost in a war forty years ago, a brother who had been younger and braver and more reckless and who had died in a skirmish that had accomplished nothing and changed nothing and was remembered by no one except the people who had loved the men who died in it.</p>
<p>“His name was Demetrios,” Iobates said, and his voice, which was usually steady and measured, took on a quality that Bellerophon recognized: the particular vibration that a voice gets when it is speaking about something that has never fully healed. “He was the sort of man who walked into a room and immediately made it louder. Not better, necessarily. Just louder. He had opinions about everything and the volume to match. Drove me half mad. I loved him more than I loved anyone else in the world, and half the time I wanted to strangle him.”</p>
<p>He paused, and in the pause, he looked at Bellerophon, and the look was an invitation, gentle and unmistakable.</p>
<p>Bellerophon could have deflected. He could have changed the subject, or made a sympathetic noise, or offered one of the ritual phrases that Greek culture provided for moments of shared grief (“The gods receive the brave”; “His shade drinks deeply in the fields of asphodel”; all the comfortable, meaningless formulas that people use to acknowledge someone else’s pain without actually touching it). He could have kept the door closed.</p>
<p>He opened it. Not wide. Just a crack, just enough to let a sliver of light through.</p>
<p>“My brother was the opposite,” he said. “He walked into a room and made it warmer. Not louder. Warmer. He had a gift for making people feel comfortable, for putting them at ease, for being the person that everyone wanted to be near. I envied that. I still do.”</p>
<p>“What was his name?”</p>
<p>“Deliades.”</p>
<p>The name came out of his mouth like a stone that had been lodged in his throat for months, and the relief of saying it, of speaking it aloud to someone who had no connection to the story, who could hear the name without judgment, without accusation, without the complex web of blame and guilt and sorrow that entangled everyone who had known Deliades in life, was so profound that Bellerophon had to press his lips together and look away, because the crack in the door was widening, and behind it was the ocean, and if it came through, it would drown him and the table and the hall and the entire kingdom of Lycia.</p>
<p>Iobates said nothing. He simply sat, and waited, and the waiting was itself a gift, the gift of a man who understood that grief has its own schedule and cannot be rushed or redirected, that it will come when it comes and go when it goes, and that the kindest thing you can do for a person who is grieving is to be present without requiring anything, to sit in the silence without trying to fill it, to be a shore against which the waves can break without being asked to stop.</p>
<p>After a while, Bellerophon said: “He died in a hunting accident. I was there. The javelin that killed the boar also… also hit him. He died quickly.”</p>
<p>It was the most he had said about Deliades’s death to anyone since he had told his father, on the day it happened, in the courtyard of the palace in Corinth with the blood still on his hands. It was not the full story. It was not the locked room. But it was the room next to the locked room, and Iobates received it with a gravity that honored its weight.</p>
<p>“You carry that,” Iobates said. It was not a question.</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>“Does it get lighter?”</p>
<p>“No. You get stronger. Or you think you do. Which might be the same thing.”</p>
<p>Iobates nodded slowly. “My brother has been dead for forty years, and I still hear his voice in crowded rooms. I think, sometimes, that the dead do not leave us. They change form. They become part of the furniture of the mind, and we learn to live with them, to arrange ourselves around them, the way you arrange a room around a piece of furniture that is too large to move.”</p>
<p>“What if you put it there yourself?” Bellerophon said, and the question came from the locked room, from the deepest and darkest part of him, and he did not mean to ask it, and he could not take it back.</p>
<p>Iobates looked at him for a long time. The hall was quiet; the other diners had drifted into their own conversations, and the two of them, the old king and the young exile, sat in a pocket of privacy that was more intimate than any closed room could have provided.</p>
<p>“Then you learn to live with that, too,” Iobates said. “Because what else is there?”</p>
<p>It was not absolution. It was not forgiveness. It was something both less and more than either: it was acceptance, the simple, unsentimental, profoundly difficult acknowledgment that the worst thing you have done is part of you, and that being part of you does not mean it is all of you, and that the distance between the worst thing and everything else is the space in which a life can be lived.</p>
<p>Bellerophon felt something shift inside him, a small tectonic movement in the deep geology of his grief, not a healing (the wound was too deep for healing; it would be with him always, a scar that ached in cold weather and in quiet moments and in the presence of brothers who reminded him of his own) but a settling, a stabilization, the moment when the ground stops shaking and you realize that you are still standing.</p>
<p>He almost told Iobates about the letter. He almost said: “The tablet I gave you, the one from Proetus, I believe it asks for my death. I believe your daughter’s husband has sent me here to be killed. I don’t know this for certain, but I feel it, the way I feel the weather changing, in my bones, in my blood, in the deep, inherited intuition that is the only useful thing my grandfather left me.”</p>
<p>He did not say it. To say it would be to accuse Proetus, and to accuse Proetus would be to accuse Stheneboea, and to accuse Stheneboea would be to undermine the marriage that bound Argos and Lycia together, and the consequences of that, the political and personal and diplomatic fallout, would be so vast and so destructive that Bellerophon, who had already destroyed one family, could not bring himself to destroy another.</p>
<p>So he said nothing. He drank his wine. He ate his food. He sat with the old king in the warm hall and listened to the bard sing songs of heroes and monsters and gods, and the letter waited on its shelf, sealed and patient, four days from being opened, four days from changing everything.</p>
<div class="section-break">
✦   ✦   ✦
</div>
<p>On the sixth day, Bellerophon walked to the river and sat on a stone and watched the water go by. The Xanthus was different from the rivers of Greece; it was bigger, slower, browner, carrying with it the sediment of the Lycian mountains, the dissolved remains of ancient rocks that had been standing since before the Titans and that were, grain by grain, being carried to the sea. The river was patient. It did not hurry. It had been doing this for longer than human memory, and it would continue doing it long after human memory had failed, and the patience of it, the sheer, geological indifference of it, was either terrifying or reassuring, depending on whether you needed the world to care about you or needed it to stop caring.</p>
<p>Bellerophon needed it to stop caring. Just for a moment. Just long enough to think.</p>
<p>He thought about running. The mountains were right there, wild and trackless, full of places where a man could disappear and never be found. He could leave the letter, leave the palace, leave Lycia, walk into the mountains and become someone else, someone with no name and no history and no sealed tablet carrying words that would kill him. He could live on wild goats and spring water and the silence of high places, and no one would ever find him, and no one would ever know what had happened to the young Corinthian exile who had arrived at the palace of Iobates with a letter and vanished into the hills.</p>
<p>He did not run. Running was what Sisyphus would have done. Running was what the old Hipponous, the boy who had not yet killed his brother, might have done. But Bellerophon was not that boy. Bellerophon was the man who had stood in a ravine with blood on his hands and had not looked away. Bellerophon was the man who had carried his own death sentence across the sea without breaking the seal. Bellerophon was the man who had, through the accumulation of grief and guilt and the slow, painful, involuntary process of growing up, learned that running was not freedom but merely a different kind of imprisonment, a prison without walls where the prisoner was both the inmate and the guard.</p>
<p>He sat by the river and watched the water and thought: let it come. Whatever it is. Let it come.</p>
<p>On the seventh day, Iobates taught him to play a Lycian board game that involved small stone pieces and a wooden board marked with a grid. The game was complex, requiring the kind of strategic thinking that Bellerophon excelled at, and Iobates was a formidable opponent, having played the game for forty years with a single-minded devotion that bordered on the religious. They played three games. Bellerophon won the first, lost the second, and drew the third, which Iobates declared, with a delighted surprise that was not entirely feigned, the first drawn game he had played in a decade.</p>
<p>“You think like a general,” Iobates said, studying the board with the expression of a man who has just discovered a new species of bird in his own garden. “You sacrifice pieces to gain position. Most young men do the opposite. They cling to their pieces and lose the board.”</p>
<p>“I have had practice at losing things,” Bellerophon said, and Iobates looked at him sharply, and something crossed the old king’s face that was part sympathy and part concern and part the growing, uncomfortable awareness that this young man, this guest, this stranger who had walked into his house with a sealed letter and a weight on his shoulders that no seventeen-year-old should have to carry, was becoming important to him.</p>
<p>On the eighth day, there was a hunt. Not a boar hunt (Bellerophon would never hunt boar again; the thought of it made his hands go cold and his vision narrow to a pinpoint, the body’s memory of trauma asserting itself with a force that no rational argument could override). A deer hunt, in the foothills above the palace, with Iobates’s best dogs and a company of young Lycian nobles who were, initially, skeptical of the Greek stranger and became, over the course of the day, impressed and then enthusiastic and then, by the time the sun was setting and the deer was being carried back to the palace on a frame of poles, something approaching admiring.</p>
<p>Bellerophon did not try to impress them. He was simply himself, which was, it turned out, impressive enough. He rode well (better than well; the Lycian horses, which were smaller and lighter than Greek horses, responded to him with an immediacy that their regular riders found frankly unsettling). He tracked well, reading the ground with an ease that came from years of hunting on the slopes of the Acrocorinth. He threw his javelin with the terrible accuracy that was his gift and his curse, and the deer went down with a single cast, cleanly, without suffering, and the young Lycians, who valued skill above all things, recognized what they were seeing and gave it the respect it deserved.</p>
<p>On the ninth day, Bellerophon woke early. The sun had not yet risen, and the palace was quiet, and the sky beyond his window was the color of slate, heavy and grey, and there was a feeling in the air, a pressure, a sense of something gathering, the way the air feels before a thunderstorm, when the atmosphere is charged with energy that has not yet found its expression.</p>
<p>Today, Iobates would read the letter.</p>
<p>Bellerophon lay in his bed and looked at the ceiling and felt the fear. It was not the sharp, immediate fear of physical danger (he had felt that in the ravine with the boar, and it was a hot, fast, electric thing that made the blood sing and the muscles tighten). This was something deeper, colder, more fundamental: the fear of the unknown, the fear of a future that was about to be decided by words he had never read, written by a man he had trusted, on behalf of a woman he had refused. It was the fear of helplessness, the fear of being a character in a story whose author you could not see, moved by forces you could not understand toward an ending you could not change.</p>
<p>He got up. He washed. He dressed. He went to the great hall.</p>
<div class="section-break">
✦   ✦   ✦
</div>
<p>Iobates was already there, seated at his usual place, with the sealed tablet before him on the table. He had not yet opened it. He was looking at it with an expression that Bellerophon, who had spent nine days studying the king’s face, could not immediately read. It was not curiosity, not exactly. It was something closer to reluctance, the expression of a man who knows that the thing he is about to do will change something and who is not entirely sure he wants the change.</p>
<p>“Good morning,” Iobates said. His voice was calm, measured, the voice of a man who has been a king for a long time and who has learned that mornings, like kingdoms, must be managed with steadiness and without panic. “I trust you slept well.”</p>
<p>“Well enough, my lord.”</p>
<p>“Sit. Eat.”</p>
<p>There was bread on the table, and honey, and a bowl of figs, the same simple, generous breakfast that had been provided every morning for nine days. Bellerophon sat. He ate. Or rather, he went through the motions of eating, tearing the bread, spreading the honey, placing the food in his mouth, chewing, swallowing, the mechanical performance of a body that was running on habit while the mind behind it was focused entirely on the sealed tablet on the table and the old man sitting across from it.</p>
<p>Iobates ate as well, slowly, methodically, as though the breakfast were a task to be completed before the next task could begin. When he had finished, he wiped his hands on a cloth, took a sip of water, and picked up the tablet.</p>
<p>He did not look at Bellerophon. He looked at the seal, at the imprint of the Argive lion, at the linen cord wound tight around the wooden boards. He held the tablet in both hands, and there was something in the way he held it, a care, a deliberation, that reminded Bellerophon of the way a priest handles a sacred object, not because the object itself is dangerous but because the ritual surrounding it demands respect.</p>
<p>He broke the seal. The wax cracked with a small, dry sound that was, in the silence of the hall, as loud as a shout. He unwound the cord. He opened the tablet.</p>
<p>He read.</p>
<p>Bellerophon watched the king’s face. He watched it the way a sailor watches the horizon, with a focused, urgent attention that is looking for the first sign of a storm, the first dark line of cloud, the first change in the color of the sky that means the wind is coming and the world is about to be rearranged.</p>
<p>The change was subtle. It was not a dramatic transformation, not the theatrical display of shock or horror that a lesser man might have produced. It was a tightening, a compression, a small, almost invisible contraction of the muscles around the eyes and mouth that turned Iobates’s kind, weathered face into something harder, something closed, something that had seen something it did not want to see and was in the process of deciding what to do about it.</p>
<p>He read the letter twice. The second reading was slower than the first, more careful, as though he were checking the words against some internal standard, making sure that what he thought he had read was actually what was written. When he finished, he closed the tablet gently, as though it contained something fragile, and set it on the table, and placed both hands flat on the wood on either side of it, and stared at it.</p>
<p>The silence lasted a long time. Bellerophon sat in it, and the silence was not empty but full, full of the things that Iobates was thinking and feeling and calculating, full of the collision between what the letter demanded and what the king’s own judgment preferred, full of the weight of obligation and honor and the impossible, terrible, fundamentally absurd position of a man who has been asked, by his own daughter’s husband, to kill a young man he has come to like.</p>
<p>When Iobates finally looked up, his eyes were different. The warmth was still there, but it was buried beneath something else, something harder, a layer of formal duty that had been applied over the personal affection like plaster over a wall, hiding what was underneath but not destroying it.</p>
<p>“Bellerophon,” the king said. “I have a task for you.”</p>
<p>Bellerophon felt the words land like stones. Not because they were surprising (he had been expecting them, or something like them, since the moment Proetus had handed him the sealed tablet in the study in Argos), but because they were real, and the difference between expecting a thing and experiencing it is the difference between reading about a fire and putting your hand in the flame.</p>
<p>“A task, my lord?”</p>
<p>“There is a creature,” Iobates said, and his voice was steady, controlled, the voice of a man delivering a sentence and doing his best to make it sound like a commission. “A creature that has been terrorizing the countryside north of here, in the mountain passes between Lycia and Caria. It has killed livestock, destroyed farmsteads, slaughtered the soldiers I have sent to deal with it. It is called the Chimera.”</p>
<p>He paused, and in the pause, Bellerophon heard the thing that was not being said: that the task was meant to kill him. That Iobates, bound by nine days of guest-right and his own honor and the fundamental decency that was the core of his character, could not bring himself to execute a man he had feasted and befriended, and so he was doing the only thing he could do, the only thing that satisfied both the letter’s demand and his own conscience. He was sending Bellerophon to a death that would be administered not by men but by a monster, a death that would be, technically, the result of combat rather than execution, a death that would allow Iobates to tell himself, and to tell Proetus, and to tell the gods, that he had not killed a guest but had merely given a guest a mission, and that the guest had died in the performance of that mission, and that the difference between a death sentence and a suicide mission was not hypocrisy but protocol.</p>
<p>“The Chimera,” Bellerophon repeated.</p>
<p>“Lion in the front. Goat in the middle. Serpent behind. It breathes fire.”</p>
<p>A silence. Then Bellerophon said: “When should I leave?”</p>
<p>Iobates closed his eyes. It was a brief gesture, barely a second, but in that second his face showed everything that his voice had not: the grief, the guilt, the wretched, grinding conflict between what he had been asked to do and what he wanted to do, between the demands of family and the demands of conscience, between the sealed letter from his son-in-law and the unsealed, open, deeply inconvenient affection he had developed for the young man sitting across from him.</p>
<p>“There is no hurry,” Iobates said quietly. “Prepare yourself. Take what supplies you need. The creature will wait. Creatures like that always do.”</p>
<p>Bellerophon stood. He bowed, because protocol required it. He walked to the door of the hall. And at the door, he stopped, and turned, and looked at Iobates, and the look that passed between them was the look of two men who understand exactly what is happening and know that neither of them can change it, and the understanding is itself a kind of bond, a terrible, intimate, wordless connection born of shared helplessness in the face of forces that are larger than both of them.</p>
<p>“Thank you for the nine days, my lord,” Bellerophon said. “They were the best I have had in a very long time.”</p>
<p>He walked out of the hall. Behind him, Iobates sat alone at the table with the open letter and the remains of the breakfast and the silence, and the silence was no longer full but empty, the particular echoing emptiness that fills a room when someone who should be in it has left, and the room remembers them, and the remembering is a kind of grief.</p>
</div>
<div class="chapter">
<div class="chapter-header">
<span class="chapter-label">— Chapter Six —</span>
<section id="the-golden-bridle" class="level2 chapter-title">
<h2 class="chapter-title">The Golden Bridle</h2>
</section>
</div>
<p>That night, Bellerophon did not sleep in his room. He walked out of the palace in the late evening, when the sky was turning from blue to violet and the first stars were appearing above the eastern mountains, and he walked through the gardens and past the outer wall and down the slope to the temple that stood at the edge of the river, a small, white, unassuming building dedicated to Athena, the goddess of wisdom and war and the kind of practical, clear-eyed intelligence that Bellerophon admired and aspired to but could not, in his current circumstances, seem to achieve. The temple was not grand. It was not one of the colossal structures that dominated the skylines of Athens or Argos, with their forests of columns and their armies of priests and their treasuries full of gold and silver offerings. It was a country temple, built to serve a community rather than impress a visitor, with whitewashed walls and a terra-cotta roof and a single room, open at one end, in which a wooden statue of the goddess stood on a stone plinth, her painted eyes staring out at the river with the fixed, impersonal intensity of a being who sees everything and judges nothing.</p>
<p>He had come to the temple not because he was devout (he was not; his relationship with the gods was complicated, as all relationships are complicated when one party has infinite power and the other has infinite questions) but because the temple was the only place he could think of where the night might hold something other than fear. He had tried thinking. He had tried planning. He had tried applying the analytical mind that was his greatest tool to the problem of the Chimera, and the analysis had produced a conclusion that was straightforward and deeply unhelpful: the Chimera was unkillable. Not metaphorically unkillable, in the way that people say a problem is unkillable when they mean it is very difficult. Actually unkillable, in the way that a creature that breathes fire and has three heads and is the offspring of Typhon and Echidna, two of the most terrifying monsters in the history of the cosmos, is unkillable by a single human being armed with a javelin and a reasonably good throwing arm.</p>
<p>He needed help. Not human help (no soldier or warrior he had met in nine days of training with the Lycian army had expressed the slightest interest in accompanying him on what everyone, with the polite discretion of people who know a death sentence when they see one, recognized as a suicide mission). Divine help. The kind of help that does not come through effort or planning or cleverness but through the grace of the gods, which is given when and where and to whom the gods choose, and which cannot be earned, only received.</p>
<p>This was a hard truth for a grandson of Sisyphus. Sisyphus had spent his entire life (and a significant portion of his afterlife) trying to prove that human cleverness could substitute for divine grace, that the mortal mind, properly applied, could outmaneuver any force, including the gods themselves. He had been wrong. His punishment proved it: an eternity of pushing a boulder up a hill, the ultimate demonstration that effort without grace is futile, that the boulder will always roll back, that the hill will always win.</p>
<p>Bellerophon was not going to push the boulder. He was going to do what Sisyphus had never done, what Sisyphus had been constitutionally incapable of doing: he was going to ask for help.</p>
<p>He lay down on the temple floor, on the cool stone, with his cloak folded under his head and the wooden eyes of Athena looking down at him from the plinth above. The stone was hard. The night was warm. The river murmured outside, the low, continuous, unchanging sound of water moving over rock, a sound that was older than temples and gods and humans and language, a sound that was, in some deep and untranslatable sense, the voice of the world itself, speaking in a language that predated meaning.</p>
<p>He closed his eyes. He did not pray, exactly. He did not know the right words, and even if he had known them, he was not sure that the right words existed, because the thing he needed to communicate was not a request but a surrender, not “give me this” but “I cannot do this alone, and I know that I cannot do this alone, and the knowing is itself a kind of prayer, because it is the first honest thing I have said to the gods in my entire life.”</p>
<p>He slept.</p>
<div class="section-break">
✦   ✦   ✦
</div>
<p>The dream came immediately, without the usual preamble of nonsense and half-images that typically preceded his deeper dreams, as though the dream had been waiting for him, as though it had been standing at the door of his consciousness all day, tapping its foot with the impatience of a guest who has arrived early and is slightly annoyed that the host is not ready.</p>
<p>He was in the temple. This was the first unusual thing, because normally his dreams took place elsewhere, in locations that bore no resemblance to wherever he had fallen asleep, as though his sleeping mind considered the waking world insufficiently interesting and preferred to do its own set design. But this dream was set in the temple, the same white walls, the same stone floor, the same wooden statue on the same stone plinth, with the same painted eyes looking down at him with the same expression of impersonal intensity.</p>
<p>Except that the statue was not a statue. The statue was a woman. Or rather, the statue had become a woman, or the woman had become the statue, or the distinction between statue and woman was, in this dream, irrelevant, because the figure standing on the plinth was both and neither, a being that occupied the space between representation and reality, between the image of a goddess and the goddess herself, and the space was not a contradiction but a doorway, and the doorway was open, and light was coming through it, light that was not the warm, yellow light of oil lamps or the hot, white light of the sun but something else, something cool and silver and immensely old, the light of intelligence itself, pure thought made visible.</p>
<p>Athena looked at him. She had grey eyes, which he knew from the stories (grey-eyed Athena, the poets called her, Athena Glaukopis, Athena of the gleaming eyes), but the stories had not prepared him for the reality of those eyes, which were not merely grey but the grey of everything: the grey of dawn, the grey of stone, the grey of the sea before a storm, the grey of iron, the grey of the smoke that rises from a fire that has consumed everything and is now, finally, going out. They were eyes that had seen the birth of the world and would see its death and found both events interesting but not, ultimately, surprising. They were eyes that knew everything and judged nothing and offered no comfort, because comfort was not their function; their function was clarity, and clarity, unlike comfort, does not tell you what you want to hear. Clarity tells you what is true.</p>
<p>“Bellerophon,” she said. Her voice was not what he expected. He had expected something grand, something resonant, something that echoed off the walls and made the stones vibrate. Instead, her voice was quiet, precise, conversational, the voice of a teacher addressing a student who is finally ready to learn the lesson that has been waiting for him all semester. “You came.”</p>
<p>“I came,” he said. In the dream, he was standing, though he had not stood up. In the dream, movement happened without transition, the way thoughts happen, without the intervening mechanics of muscle and bone. “I need help.”</p>
<p>“I know.”</p>
<p>“The Chimera…”</p>
<p>“Cannot be killed by a man on foot. Cannot be killed by a man on horseback. Cannot be killed by a man in a chariot. Cannot be killed, in fact, by any conventional means, which is rather the point of it, since the gods who created it (and I use the word ‘created’ loosely; ‘failed to prevent’ would be more accurate) intended it as a demonstration that certain problems cannot be solved with strength or speed or cleverness alone.”</p>
<p>“Then how?”</p>
<p>“From above.”</p>
<p>Two words. From above. And with those two words, the dream shifted, and Bellerophon was no longer in the temple but somewhere else, somewhere high, somewhere where the air was thin and cold and the sky was very close and the ground was very far away, and below him the world was spread out like a tapestry, green and brown and blue, and the mountains were wrinkles in the cloth and the rivers were silver threads and the sea was a great dark border at the edge of everything, and he was above it all, looking down, and the looking-down was not vertigo but revelation, the sudden, overwhelming, soul-shaking understanding that the world was not the narrow, heavy, earth-bound thing he had always believed it to be but something vast and light and interconnected, and that the boundaries he had lived within, the walls of cities and the edges of maps and the limits of what was considered possible, were not real boundaries at all but merely the borders of his own imagination.</p>
<p>From above. You had to go above the Chimera. You had to rise higher than the fire could reach, higher than the lion could leap, higher than the serpent could strike. You had to leave the ground, which was the Chimera’s domain, and enter the sky, which was the domain of birds and gods and…</p>
<p>Horses. One horse. A specific horse. A horse he had been dreaming of since childhood.</p>
<p>“You will need a mount,” Athena said, and the dream was back in the temple now, and she was looking at him with those grey eyes that held everything and revealed nothing, and in her hand she held an object that shone with a light that was neither gold nor silver but something between, something that had the warmth of gold and the coolness of silver and the permanence of both, an object that was so beautiful, so perfectly and completely itself, that looking at it made Bellerophon’s chest ache with a longing that was not desire but recognition, the way you feel when you see a face you have been dreaming of and realize that the dream was a memory of the future.</p>
<p>It was a bridle.</p>
<p>A golden bridle, though “golden” was an approximation, a mortal word applied to a divine object, the way you might call the ocean “big” or the sky “blue,” true but laughably insufficient. The metalwork was finer than any human smithcraft, the links so delicate they looked like they would break if you breathed on them but which were, Bellerophon somehow understood, stronger than bronze or iron or anything else in the mortal world. The bit was smooth and gentle, designed not to cause pain but to communicate, to create a channel of understanding between the hand that held the reins and the mouth that accepted the bit, a bridge between two minds that was based not on dominance but on trust.</p>
<p>“Take it,” Athena said, and held it out to him.</p>
<p>He reached for it. His hand closed around the metal. It was warm, as warm as living skin, and it hummed, a low, subsonic vibration that he felt not in his ears but in his teeth, in his bones, in the deep architecture of his body, as though the bridle were resonating with some frequency that was already present inside him, a note that had been playing in his blood since birth, unheard and unrecognized until this moment.</p>
<p>“There is a spring,” Athena said. “Pirene. You know it.”</p>
<p>He did know it. The fountain in Corinth. The sacred spring where the water was clear as glass and the mosaic tiles at the bottom were visible from ten feet above. The spring he had paused at on the morning he left Corinth, the spring that had tugged at him with a recognition he could not explain.</p>
<p>“He comes to drink there,” Athena said. “At dawn. Every dawn. He has been waiting for you.”</p>
<p>“Pegasus,” Bellerophon said, and the name, spoken aloud in the dream, rang like a bell, a clear, pure, crystalline sound that filled the temple and bounced off the walls and rose through the roof and dissipated into the night sky, where it joined the other sounds of the world, the river and the wind and the stars turning on their vast, invisible axes.</p>
<p>“Born from the blood of Medusa,” Athena said. “When Perseus cut her head and the blood fell on the earth and the earth gave birth to what the blood demanded. He is not a horse, though he wears the form of one. He is the possibility of flight made flesh. He is the proof that the world is larger than the ground.”</p>
<p>She looked at him, and in her grey eyes there was something that might, in a being less divine and more human, have been called affection. “He has been dreaming of you, too, Bellerophon. Did you know that?”</p>
<p>He had not known. But hearing it, he believed it, the way you believe something that you have always suspected but never dared to confirm: with a rush of certainty that feels less like learning and more like remembering.</p>
<p>“The bridle is the key,” Athena said. “Without it, you cannot approach him. With it, you can. But the bridle is not control. It is communication. It is the means by which two beings who were not designed to understand each other can learn to speak the same language. Use it gently. Use it honestly. Do not lie through the reins. He will know.”</p>
<p>“How do I get to Pirene? It is in Corinth. Corinth is across the sea.”</p>
<p>“The dream does not end at the temple,” Athena said, and her voice was quieter now, as though she were speaking from a greater distance, as though the dream were beginning to thin, like mist in sunlight, the images losing their solidity, the sounds losing their clarity, the whole elaborate construction of divine communication beginning to dissolve back into the ordinary darkness of sleep. “There is more than one Pirene. The spring feeds many fountains. You will find one closer than you think. He comes to all of them. He comes to wherever the water remembers his mother’s blood.”</p>
<p>The dream faded. The temple became the temple, solid and real and ordinary. Athena became the statue, wood and paint and the fixed, impersonal stare of an object that has never been alive. The silver light withdrew, and the warm, yellow light of early morning took its place, creeping through the open end of the temple and painting the stone floor in long, angular stripes of gold.</p>
<p>Bellerophon opened his eyes. He was lying on the temple floor, on his cloak, exactly as he had lain down the night before. The river was murmuring outside. The birds were beginning to sing. The world was waking up around him, going through the ordinary, miraculous process of transitioning from darkness to light, from silence to sound, from the private world of sleep to the shared world of the day.</p>
<p>He sat up. He looked around. The temple was empty. The statue was a statue.</p>
<p>And lying on the stone floor beside him, where nothing had been when he lay down, was the golden bridle.</p>
<div class="section-break">
✦   ✦   ✦
</div>
<p>He picked it up. His hands were shaking, which was not a condition that Bellerophon was accustomed to and which he found, in a detached, analytical way, interesting. His hands had not shaken when he held his dying brother in the ravine. His hands had not shaken when he received his death sentence from Proetus in the study in Argos. His hands had not shaken when Iobates read the letter and assigned him the task that was meant to kill him. But they shook now, holding this object, this impossible, divine, not-supposed-to-exist object that had been given to him in a dream and was now, undeniably, irrefutably, in his hands.</p>
<p>The bridle was real. The metalwork was solid, tactile, present. He could feel the individual links of the chain, the smooth curve of the bit, the subtle variations in the surface of the metal that were not imperfections but details, the kind of details that human craftsmen aspire to and never achieve, the marks not of manufacture but of intention, as though every link and curve and joint had been made not by hands but by thought, by the pure, focused, undiluted will of a goddess who knew exactly what she wanted to create and created it without the intervening clumsiness of physical process.</p>
<p>He held it to the light. The light passed through it and around it and seemed, somehow, to be captured by it, absorbed into the metal and reflected back in a slightly different form, warmer, more concentrated, as though the bridle were not merely an object but a lens, a thing that focused the light of the world and gave it direction.</p>
<p>He thought: this is divine. This is a thing that was made by a god. I am holding a thing that was made by a god.</p>
<p>The thought was not comfortable. It was not the warm, reassuring thought of a man who has received a gift and feels grateful. It was the cold, clarifying thought of a man who has been given a weapon and understands, with the full weight of the understanding, that weapons change the people who carry them, that to hold a divine object is to enter into a relationship with the divine that is not casual and cannot be reversed, and that the terms of the relationship are set not by the human but by the god, and the human’s only options are to accept or to refuse, and refusal, while theoretically possible, is not, in practice, the kind of thing that wise people do when the goddess of wisdom has personally handed them a golden bridle and told them to go find a flying horse.</p>
<p>He wrapped the bridle in his cloak. He walked out of the temple into the morning.</p>
<p>The world looked different. Not literally different (the river was still the river, the mountains were still the mountains, the palace on its terrace above the valley was still the palace on its terrace above the valley), but different in the way that the world looks different after a significant experience: brighter, sharper, more defined, as though the experience had cleaned a lens that he hadn’t known was dirty, and everything he saw through the cleaned lens was more vivid, more detailed, more present than it had been before.</p>
<p>He went to the palace. He went to the steward. He asked about springs.</p>
<p>“Springs, my lord?” The steward was a man who prided himself on being unflappable, and he managed, with visible effort, to maintain this reputation in the face of a question that was, by any standard, unusual. Guests in the palace typically asked for food, or wine, or clean clothes, or directions to the privy. They did not typically ask about springs.</p>
<p>“Sacred springs,” Bellerophon specified. “Springs that are connected to the spring of Pirene in Corinth. Springs where the water comes up from deep in the earth, from the same source as Pirene. Springs where…” He hesitated, aware that what he was about to say would sound, to a sensible person, slightly deranged. “Springs where a divine creature might come to drink.”</p>
<p>The steward blinked. It was a single blink, slow and deliberate, the blink of a man who is processing information that does not fit into any of his existing categories and who needs a moment to create a new one. Then he said: “There is a spring in the hills above the palace. Half an hour’s walk, perhaps less. It is called the Spring of Oenoanda, though the locals call it the White Spring, because the water comes up through limestone and is so clear that it looks white in certain lights. It is said to be sacred. The shepherds say that the water is the same water that feeds the spring of Pirene, that it flows underground, beneath the sea, from Corinth to Lycia, through channels in the deep rock that are as old as the world.”</p>
<p>He paused, and added, with the careful diplomacy of a man who wants to be helpful without being ridiculous: “The shepherds say many things, of course. Shepherds spend a great deal of time alone, and solitude encourages the imagination.”</p>
<p>“Where exactly is this spring?”</p>
<p>The steward gave him directions. Bellerophon thanked him and left, and the steward watched him go with the expression of a man who suspects that something important is happening but cannot, for the life of him, figure out what it is.</p>
<div class="section-break">
✦   ✦   ✦
</div>
<p>The Spring of Oenoanda was exactly where the steward had said it was: half an hour’s walk up a narrow path that wound through stands of cedar and wild olive, climbing steadily until it reached a small, flat clearing at the base of a limestone cliff. The cliff was white, brilliant white, the limestone bleached by centuries of sun and rain to a color that was closer to snow than to stone, and at the base of the cliff, where the rock met the earth, the water emerged.</p>
<p>It came up through a fissure in the stone, a narrow opening no wider than a man’s arm, and it flowed outward into a natural basin that was perhaps ten feet across and three feet deep, lined with smooth stones that the water had been polishing for millennia. The water was clear. Not merely clear, not the ordinary transparency of clean water, but a clarity so absolute, so total, so beyond the normal optical properties of a liquid, that looking into it was like looking into nothing, into a perfect absence of obstruction, a window that had no glass, and the stones at the bottom of the basin seemed to float in air, weightless and impossibly precise, each one distinct, each one present, as though the water were not obscuring them but revealing them, showing them as they truly were, stripped of the distortions that the world of air and light imposed on everything else.</p>
<p>Bellerophon sat down beside the spring. He set the wrapped bridle on the ground beside him. He waited.</p>
<p>The waiting was the hardest part. Not because it was boring (it was not; the spring was beautiful, the clearing was peaceful, and the morning was unfolding around him with the slow, generous beauty of a morning that knows it has nowhere to be and is in no hurry to get there). The waiting was hard because it required a kind of trust that Bellerophon was not naturally equipped to provide. Trust was not a skill that Sisyphus’s heirs cultivated. Sisyphus had trusted nothing and no one, and his distrust had been, in many ways, vindicated, because the world had, in fact, been trying to get him, and his paranoia had been not paranoia but accurate assessment. His descendants had inherited this suspicion along with the dark eyes and the clever mind, and the suspicion was, in most circumstances, a useful trait, a survival mechanism that kept them alert and alive in a world that was, by and large, not on their side.</p>
<p>But this was not a circumstance where suspicion was useful. This was a circumstance where the only thing that would work was the opposite of suspicion: faith. Not religious faith (though the bridle in his hands was proof that the gods were real and paying attention). Something more personal. The faith that the dream was true. The faith that Athena had not deceived him. The faith that a flying horse, born from the blood of a monster, would come to a spring in the hills of Lycia to drink, and that when it came, Bellerophon would know what to do.</p>
<p>He waited. The sun climbed. The shadows shortened. A hawk circled overhead, riding the thermals with the effortless grace of a creature for whom flight was not a miracle but a habit. The water in the spring bubbled and shone, and the stones at the bottom shifted and glinted, and the world was quiet, and Bellerophon waited, and the golden bridle lay beside him, warm as skin, humming with its subsonic note, patient and ready and full of a purpose that was, at this moment, larger than his ability to understand.</p>
<p>He thought about Deliades. He thought about the conversation on the terrace in Corinth, the sunset, the two brothers sitting together in the dying light. He thought about what Deliades had said: “People like you always leave. People who are too big for the room they’re standing in.” He thought about the rooms he had stood in since then: the ravine, the court of Argos, the ship, the palace of Iobates. None of them had been big enough. None of them had been the room he was meant to stand in. And now here he was, sitting beside a spring in the hills of Lycia, waiting for a flying horse, and the sky was above him, enormous and blue and limitless, and maybe, just maybe, the sky was the room. Maybe the sky was the only room big enough for a man who had been too big for every other room he had ever stood in.</p>
<p>He waited. He did not know how long. Time, in that clearing beside that spring, did not behave the way time usually behaved. It did not march forward in its orderly, predictable, one-second-at-a-time fashion. It pooled, and eddied, and sometimes seemed to stop entirely, and sometimes seemed to rush forward in great surges, and the effect was disorienting in a way that was not unpleasant, like being gently rocked in a current that you could not see and could not resist and did not, ultimately, want to resist, because the current was carrying you somewhere, and the somewhere was important, and the only thing you had to do was let it carry you.</p>
<p>And then, between one heartbeat and the next, between one breath and the next, between one moment and the moment after, without fanfare or warning or the kind of dramatic entrance that stories usually provide for their most important characters, Pegasus arrived.</p>
<div class="section-break">
✦   ✦   ✦
</div>
<p>He did not hear it come. He did not see it approach. One moment the clearing was empty except for himself and the spring and the white cliff and the hawk overhead, and the next moment there was a horse standing at the edge of the water, and the horse was white, and the horse had wings.</p>
<p>The word “white” is inadequate. Every metaphor is inadequate. Cloud, snow, bone, milk, moonlight: all of these approximations gesture toward the color of Pegasus without arriving at it, because the color was not a color in the ordinary sense, not a wavelength of light reflected from a surface, but something more fundamental, something that seemed to generate its own light from within, the way certain deep-sea creatures generate their own light in the darkness of the abyss. Pegasus was white the way truth is white: pure, undiluted, containing within itself all other colors in perfect, undifferentiated potential.</p>
<p>He was larger than a mortal horse. Not monstrously larger, not the size of an elephant or a building (the myths that describe Pegasus as enormous are exaggerating; the gods, as a rule, prefer elegance to spectacle). Perhaps a hand taller at the shoulder than the largest horses Bellerophon had ridden, and broader in the chest, and deeper in the barrel, with the dense, compact musculature of an animal built not for speed on the ground (though he was, Bellerophon would learn, impossibly fast on the ground as well) but for the far more demanding physics of flight, which requires a power-to-weight ratio that no earthly horse could achieve and a cardiovascular system that bordered on the miraculous.</p>
<p>The wings were folded against his sides, and they were, like everything else about him, not quite what the stories described. They were not bird’s wings. They were not feathered. They were something else, something that Bellerophon did not have a word for and would never find a word for, because the thing they were had no equivalent in the mortal world. The closest comparison was perhaps the wing of a moth, if the moth were the size of a horse and the wing were made not of scales and membrane but of something between light and substance, a material that was neither solid nor liquid nor gas but all three simultaneously, a material that shimmered and shifted and caught the light in ways that should not have been physically possible, producing colors that were not on the spectrum and patterns that were not in nature and effects that made the eye, accustomed to the reliable, predictable behavior of mortal materials, feel slightly dizzy and profoundly inadequate.</p>
<p>His mane was long and white and moved in a wind that was not blowing. His tail was the same. His eyes were the color of the sky at the highest point of noon, the deep, clear, infinite blue that sits at the very top of the atmosphere, where the air thins to nothing and the stars are visible even in daylight. His hooves were silver, or appeared to be silver, the metal catching the light of the morning sun and throwing it back in small, bright sparks that scattered across the clearing like fragments of a shattered mirror.</p>
<p>He was beautiful. But “beautiful” is what you say when you see a sunset or a flower or a face that pleases you. What Bellerophon felt, looking at Pegasus, was not pleasure but awe, the specific, overwhelming, slightly terrifying experience of being in the presence of something that is so far beyond you, so far beyond anything you have ever seen or imagined or dreamed, that the only appropriate response is silence, because words, even the best words, even the words of poets and prophets and the gods themselves, are too small to contain what you are seeing.</p>
<p>Pegasus lowered his head to the spring. He drank. The sound of his drinking was the only sound in the clearing, a soft, rhythmic sound that was somehow the most important sound in the world, the sound of a divine creature performing an ordinary act, and the ordinariness of it, the sheer, beautiful ordinariness of a horse drinking water, made Bellerophon want to laugh and cry and fall to his knees and do all three at once, because the divine is not separate from the ordinary; it is the ordinary, seen clearly, seen truly, seen from the place where the lens is clean and the light is right and everything is exactly what it is and nothing more and nothing less.</p>
<p>Pegasus drank. And then he raised his head, and the water dripped from his muzzle in silver drops that fell back into the spring and sent small, perfect ripples across the surface, and he turned his great head and looked at Bellerophon.</p>
<p>Their eyes met.</p>
<p>Bellerophon had dreamed of this moment. He had dreamed of it since childhood, the meeting of eyes, the recognition, the sense of being seen by something that knew him completely and loved him anyway. But the dream, like all dreams, had been a rehearsal, a sketch, a rough approximation of the real thing, and the real thing was so much more than the dream that the dream, in retrospect, seemed like a child’s drawing compared to the thing it depicted.</p>
<p>The horse looked at him. The blue eyes held no judgment. No fear. No challenge. They held recognition. They held the look of a creature that has been waiting for a very long time, with a patience that is not human patience (which is endurance, white-knuckled and grudging) but divine patience (which is certainty, the unshakeable knowledge that the thing you are waiting for will come, because it must, because the story requires it, because the pattern demands it).</p>
<p>Bellerophon stood. Slowly. Carefully. The way you stand when you are in the presence of something wild and powerful and sacred and you understand, with every cell of your body, that the wrong movement, the wrong gesture, the wrong breath, could shatter the moment and scatter it like startled birds.</p>
<p>He picked up the golden bridle.</p>
<p>Pegasus watched him. The blue eyes followed his movements with an intelligence that was not horse-intelligence (which is considerable but specific, focused on the immediate, on the tangible, on the here-and-now) but something broader, deeper, more encompassing, an intelligence that understood not just what Bellerophon was doing but what he was feeling, what he was thinking, what he had been and what he might become.</p>
<p>Bellerophon stood at the edge of the spring. Pegasus stood on the other side. Between them, the water shimmered, clear and bright, and in the water Bellerophon could see two reflections: his own, dark and human and imperfect, and the horse’s, white and divine and luminous, and the two reflections overlapped at the edges, mingling, blurring, becoming, for a moment, a single image that was neither fully human nor fully divine but something new, something that had never existed before, something that was, perhaps, the thing they would become together.</p>
<p>He held out the bridle. He held it gently, the way you hold a gift, the way you hold an offering, the way you hold something precious that you are placing in someone else’s hands because you trust them to know what to do with it.</p>
<p>“I need you,” he said. The words were simple, ordinary, human. They were the truest thing he had ever said.</p>
<p>Pegasus regarded him for a long moment. The blue eyes were steady, unblinking, infinite. Then the great white head lowered, slowly, deliberately, with the grace of a creature that has never made an ungainly movement in its life, and the soft, warm muzzle touched Bellerophon’s outstretched hand, and the touch was electric, a current of something that was not electricity but felt like electricity, a pulse of connection that traveled up his arm and into his chest and settled there, in the space where his grief lived, not replacing the grief but joining it, coexisting with it, adding to it the one thing that grief, on its own, can never produce: hope.</p>
<p>The clearing was still. The spring bubbled. The hawk had landed in a cedar tree and was watching with the air of a creature that has seen many things in its life but has never seen anything quite like this. The morning light lay on the white cliff like a blessing.</p>
<p>Bellerophon held the bridle. Pegasus held still. And between them, in the space where the human and the divine meet, something began.</p>
</div>
<div class="chapter">
<div class="chapter-header">
<span class="chapter-label">— Chapter Seven —</span>
<section id="the-taming" class="level2 chapter-title">
<h2 class="chapter-title">The Taming</h2>
</section>
</div>
<p>Pegasus did not want the bridle. This needs to be understood immediately and completely, because what followed, the entire process that would later be called “the taming” by poets and storytellers who were not present and who understood very little about what actually happened, was built on this foundation: the horse did not want to be bridled. He did not want to be ridden. He did not want to be tamed, because taming, in the vocabulary of a creature that was born free and divine and accountable to nothing in the mortal world, was a kind of death, a surrender of sovereignty, a diminishment of the self that no amount of golden metalwork or divine endorsement could make palatable.</p>
<p>Bellerophon understood this. He understood it the way he understood most important things: not through thought but through sensation, through the sudden, visceral, almost physical awareness that the creature standing in front of him was not a horse that happened to have wings but a being of fundamental independence, a being whose freedom was not a quality it possessed but a quality it was, in the way that water is wet and fire is hot and the sky is high. To put a bridle on Pegasus was to put a frame around the sky. It could be done, in theory, but the frame would always be a lie, a human imposition on a thing that existed without boundaries, and the horse knew this, and the horse resented it, and the resentment was not petulant or childish but ancient and justified and as deep as the roots of the mountains.</p>
<p>When Bellerophon raised the bridle toward Pegasus’s head, the horse moved. Not violently. There was no rearing, no kicking, no wild-eyed thrashing of the kind that mortal horses produce when they are frightened or angry. Pegasus simply stepped back, a single, fluid, almost imperceptible step that took him exactly out of Bellerophon’s reach, and the stepping-back was more eloquent than any display of force could have been, because it communicated, with perfect clarity, the message: I am choosing not to be touched. And the choice is mine, and the choice will always be mine, and your golden bridle and your goddess’s blessing and your need, however genuine, do not override my right to refuse.</p>
<p>Bellerophon lowered the bridle. He stood still. He looked at the horse, and the horse looked at him, and between them the spring bubbled and shone, and the morning aged slowly around them, and the silence was not empty but full, full of the negotiation that was happening without words, a negotiation between two beings who needed something from each other and were trying, with the awkwardness and the dignity that attends all genuine attempts at communication between radically different kinds of consciousness, to find a language that both could speak.</p>
<p>He tried again. He approached slowly, one step at a time, keeping his body low, his shoulders relaxed, his hands visible and open, the way he had been taught to approach nervous horses by the grooms in his father’s stables, men who understood, with the practical wisdom of people who work with large, powerful animals every day, that the key to establishing trust with a horse is to make yourself as small and as unthreatening as possible, which is, when you think about it, the opposite of what most people do when they want something, which is to make themselves as large and as impressive as possible, and which is, consequently, exactly the wrong approach.</p>
<p>Pegasus let him come closer this time. One step. Two. Three. The blue eyes watched him, unblinking, and in those eyes Bellerophon could see himself reflected, a small, dark figure against the bright limestone of the cliff, and the reflection was not flattering (reflections in divine eyes never are; they show you not as you wish to be seen but as you are, which is simultaneously more and less than the image you have constructed, and the gap between the image and the reality is the space where all genuine growth begins).</p>
<p>Four steps. Five. He was close enough now to reach out and touch the horse’s neck. Close enough to smell him, and the smell was not the familiar, earthy, hay-and-sweat smell of mortal horses but something else, something clean and high and impossible to identify, the smell of altitude, the smell of rain before it falls, the smell of the air at the top of a mountain where no human has ever stood.</p>
<p>He raised his hand. Not the hand with the bridle; his free hand, empty, open, palm up. An offering of nothing. A gesture that said: I have nothing to give you except myself, and myself is all I have, and it is not much, and I know it is not much, but it is honest, and honesty, in a world full of deception and pretense and sealed letters and false accusations, is the only currency that is worth anything.</p>
<p>Pegasus regarded the hand. The great head tilted, just slightly, the way a dog tilts its head when it is trying to understand something that does not fit into its existing framework of comprehension. Then the head came forward, slowly, with the careful deliberation of a creature that has decided to investigate but has not yet decided to trust, and the soft, warm muzzle touched Bellerophon’s palm.</p>
<p>The touch lasted perhaps three seconds. In those three seconds, Bellerophon felt something that he would spend the rest of his life trying to describe and would never, not once, come close to describing adequately. It was not a sensation in the ordinary sense. It was not heat or cold or pressure or electricity, though it contained elements of all of these. It was something more like the experience of suddenly being connected to a much larger system, the way a tributary feels when it joins a river, the way a note feels when it joins a chord, the way a single mind might feel if it were, for one impossible, transcendent moment, connected to every other mind that had ever existed or ever would exist, and the connection was not overwhelming but clarifying, not confusing but simplifying, because the experience of being part of something larger than yourself does not make you smaller; it makes you, for the first time, the right size.</p>
<p>The touch ended. Pegasus stepped back. Bellerophon stood with his hand still raised, his palm still open, and the place where the muzzle had touched his skin was warm, and the warmth was spreading, up his arm, into his shoulder, across his chest, filling the spaces between his ribs, settling into the cavities and crevices of his body like water filling a vessel that has been empty for a very long time.</p>
<p>He lowered his hand. He sat down on the ground, cross-legged, beside the spring. He placed the bridle in his lap. And he waited.</p>
<div class="section-break">
✦   ✦   ✦
</div>
<p>The waiting lasted hours. It may have lasted longer; Bellerophon, sitting beside the spring in the clearing beneath the white cliff, lost track of time in the way that time is lost when the mind enters a state that is not quite sleep and not quite wakefulness but something between, a liminal space where thought and sensation merge into a single, continuous flow of awareness that has no beginning and no end and no urgency. The sun moved across the sky. The shadows rotated around the clearing like the hands of a sundial. The hawk came and went and came again. The spring bubbled, patient and ancient, and the water reflected the sky, and the sky reflected the water, and the reflections reflected each other in an infinite regression that was, if you stared at it long enough, slightly hypnotic.</p>
<p>Pegasus did not leave. This was the crucial thing, the thing that Bellerophon noted with a quiet, cautious hope that he was careful not to inflate into expectation. The horse did not leave the clearing. He moved around it, circling the spring at a distance of perhaps twenty feet, sometimes grazing on the thin grass that grew between the rocks (and Bellerophon noted, with the detached fascination of a horseman watching a horse do horse-things, that Pegasus grazed the way mortal horses graze, tearing the grass with his teeth and chewing it with the slow, lateral jaw-motion that is common to all equines, divine or otherwise, which was somehow comforting, evidence that the divine and the ordinary were not as far apart as theology suggested). Sometimes he stood still, facing the mountains, his wings half-spread, catching the wind the way a sail catches the wind, and the wind moved through the strange, shimmering material of the wings and made a sound that was not like any sound Bellerophon had ever heard, a low, humming, harmonic sound that was less like music and more like the audible manifestation of a mathematical principle, the sound that beauty makes when it is expressed not as an idea but as a physical phenomenon.</p>
<p>Sometimes Pegasus looked at him. The blue eyes would find him, sitting cross-legged by the spring, and regard him with that steady, assessing, deeply intelligent gaze, and Bellerophon would look back, and the looking-back was itself a communication, a silent, ongoing conversation between two beings who were circling each other the way planets circle a sun, drawn by a gravity that neither had chosen and neither could resist.</p>
<p>What was the horse thinking? Bellerophon wondered this, and the wondering was not idle curiosity but genuine, urgent need, because what Pegasus was thinking would determine whether what Bellerophon needed was possible. He was not a man who ordinarily concerned himself with what horses were thinking (most horsemen don’t; they concern themselves with what horses are doing, which is a different and more practical question), but Pegasus was not a horse, or rather, Pegasus was a horse in the way that a god is a person: technically accurate but fundamentally misleading, the form concealing a content that was orders of magnitude larger and more complex than the form could contain.</p>
<p>What was Pegasus thinking? Perhaps he was thinking about his mother, Medusa, who had been beautiful once, before Athena (the same goddess who had given Bellerophon the bridle; the irony was not lost on him) had cursed her for a transgression that was, depending on the version of the story you believed, either a genuine sin or a catastrophic injustice. Perhaps he was thinking about his birth, the moment when Perseus’s sword cut through Medusa’s neck and her blood fell on the earth and the earth, which has its own ideas about what blood should become, produced not death but life, not horror but beauty, not a monster but its opposite: a creature of such purity and grace that its existence was itself an argument for the proposition that the world, despite overwhelming evidence to the contrary, tends toward redemption.</p>
<p>Or perhaps Pegasus was not thinking at all, in the human sense. Perhaps what was happening inside that luminous skull was not thought but something older and more fundamental, something pre-verbal, pre-conceptual, a kind of knowing that existed before language was invented to describe it, and that language, with its categories and its distinctions and its insistence on dividing the world into subject and object, this and that, self and other, could never adequately capture.</p>
<p>The afternoon wore on. Bellerophon sat. Pegasus circled. The conversation continued, wordless and essential, and with each circuit, each exchange of glances, each moment of shared silence, the distance between them grew smaller, not in physical space (Pegasus maintained his twenty-foot radius with a consistency that bordered on the geometric) but in something else, some other dimension of closeness that was not measured in feet or yards but in trust, and trust, unlike distance, cannot be reduced by walking toward it. It can only be reduced by waiting, by being present, by demonstrating, through the accumulated evidence of hours and hours of patient, non-threatening, non-demanding presence, that you are what you appear to be, and that what you appear to be is worthy of trust.</p>
<p>Bellerophon waited. He was, he realized, good at waiting. This surprised him, because he had always thought of himself as an impatient person, a person of action, a person whose grandfather had literally refused to wait for death and had tricked his way out of it. But the impatience, he understood now, had been a surface quality, a skin over a deeper patience that had been there all along, waiting (patiently) to be discovered. The deeper patience was the patience of a horseman who knows that the horse will come when the horse is ready and not before. It was the patience of a hunter who knows that the quarry will emerge from cover in its own time and that rushing it will only drive it deeper into hiding. It was the patience of a man who has lost everything and has learned, through that loss, that the things that matter most cannot be seized; they can only be received.</p>
<div class="section-break">
✦   ✦   ✦
</div>
<p>The moment came in the late afternoon, when the sun was low and the light was golden and the shadows were long and the air had the warm, resinous, end-of-day quality that is the particular gift of Mediterranean evenings, when the world seems to exhale after a day of holding its breath and everything softens and the hard edges of things become, for a brief and beautiful interval, gentle.</p>
<p>Pegasus stopped circling. He stood at the edge of the spring, facing Bellerophon, and his body language changed. The tension that had been present all day, the held-back quality, the ready-to-run alertness that is the divine horse’s equivalent of a mortal horse’s flight instinct, eased. His head lowered slightly. His ears came forward. His weight shifted from his hindquarters (ready to flee) to his front legs (ready to stand). And something in his eyes changed, too, some final barrier dropping, some last assessment being completed, some internal decision being made that was, Bellerophon sensed, as significant and as irrevocable as any decision he had ever made in his own life.</p>
<p>Pegasus walked toward him. Not circling. Not maintaining distance. Walking directly toward him, one step at a time, hooves silent on the grass, wings folded tight against his sides, head low, the great blue eyes fixed on Bellerophon’s face with an expression that was not submission (Pegasus would never submit; submission was not in his nature, was antithetical to his nature, was the one thing that even a golden bridle blessed by Athena herself could not impose on a creature whose essence was freedom) but something else, something that Bellerophon did not have a word for until much later, when he had lived with the horse long enough to understand its vocabulary of gestures and postures and glances, and the word, when he finally found it, was this: consent.</p>
<p>Pegasus was consenting. Not submitting. Consenting. The difference is the difference between a prisoner who obeys because he must and a partner who agrees because he chooses, and the difference is everything, because consent implies equality, and equality implies respect, and respect is the only foundation on which a relationship between a mortal and a divine being can be built without the mortal being destroyed by the building.</p>
<p>The horse stopped in front of him. Two feet away. Close enough that Bellerophon could feel the warmth radiating from the great white body, a warmth that was not merely physical but something else, something that carried with it a sense of immense, concentrated life-force, the heat of a furnace that burns not with fire but with existence itself, with the raw, undiluted energy of being alive in a way that mortal creatures, with their limited, time-bound, entropy-subject lives, can only approach but never achieve.</p>
<p>Bellerophon stood. He stood slowly, keeping his movements smooth and deliberate, and he raised the golden bridle, and the bridle caught the late-afternoon light and shone, and Pegasus looked at the bridle, and then looked at Bellerophon, and in that look was the final question, the only question that mattered: are you worthy of this?</p>
<p>Bellerophon did not know the answer. He did not know if he was worthy. He was a kinslayer, a man marked by blood, carrying a guilt that no ritual could dissolve and no god could lift. He was the grandson of a man condemned to futile labor for eternity. He was a exile, a wanderer, a carrier of sealed letters he could not read, a man whose life had been a series of departures from places that did not want him and arrivals at places that wanted to kill him. He was, by any objective measure, a poor candidate for the honor of riding a divine horse.</p>
<p>But he was also a man who had come to a temple in the night and laid down his pride on the stone floor and asked for help. He was a man who had carried his own death sentence across the sea without breaking the seal, not because he was brave but because he was honest, and honesty, in a world of deception, is its own kind of bravery. He was a man who had sat beside a spring for an entire day, waiting, patient, present, asking for nothing except the chance to be seen, and the seeing had been enough, and the patience had been enough, and the asking-for-nothing had been, paradoxically, the thing that earned him everything.</p>
<p>He placed the bridle gently over Pegasus’s head. His hands were steady now (they had stopped shaking hours ago, replaced by a calm that was not the absence of fear but its transformation, fear transmuted into reverence, which is what fear becomes when its object is not a threat but a mystery). The golden metal settled against the white coat. The bit, that smooth, gentle instrument of communication, rested against the horse’s lips, and Pegasus opened his mouth, and the bit slid in, and the bridle was on, and the world did not end, and the sky did not fall, and the horse did not bolt, and Bellerophon stood with the reins in his hands and the horse before him and the spring behind him and the mountains above him and the evening light all around him, and he wept.</p>
<p>He did not weep from sadness. He did not weep from relief. He wept from something that has no name in Greek or in any other language that Bellerophon knew, something that is felt only at the moments when life exceeds the capacity of the self to contain it, when the experience is so large and so true and so completely, utterly, overwhelmingly real that the body, unable to process it through the normal channels of thought and sensation, resorts to the oldest and most primitive form of expression available to it, and the tears come, and the tears are not a response to the experience but part of the experience, an overflow, a release, the pressure valve opening on a system that has been running at maximum capacity for too long and has finally, finally been given permission to let go.</p>
<p>Pegasus stood still. The blue eyes watched the tears with the patient, unsurprised calm of a creature that has seen mortals weep before and understands that weeping, for mortals, is not weakness but a kind of necessary breathing, the exhalation that follows an inhalation that has been held too long.</p>
<p>The tears stopped. Things compose themselves, eventually. Bellerophon wiped his face with the back of his hand, a gesture so ordinary, so completely and absurdly human, that it felt almost sacrilegious in the presence of a divine being, but Pegasus did not seem to mind. Pegasus, it turned out, was remarkably tolerant of human frailty, which was perhaps a consequence of being born from the death of a creature that had once been human, and which carried, in its immortal blood, the memory of what it was like to be mortal, and therefore what it was like to be small, and afraid, and imperfect, and trying.</p>
<div class="section-break">
✦   ✦   ✦
</div>
<p>He mounted. This, too, was not what the stories describe. The stories say that Bellerophon leaped onto Pegasus’s back with the athletic grace of a hero in a fresco, vaulting onto the divine steed in a single, fluid motion that demonstrated his worthiness and his skill. The reality was more awkward. Pegasus was tall, taller than any horse Bellerophon had ridden, and the wings, even folded, created an obstruction that made the usual mounting technique (left hand on the mane, left foot on whatever passes for a stirrup, swing the right leg over) difficult. He ended up scrambling, inelegantly, using a rock beside the spring as a mounting block, and the process involved a certain amount of ungainly leg-swinging and a moment when he was balanced on his stomach across the horse’s back like a sack of grain before managing to get his right leg over and sit upright.</p>
<p>Pegasus bore this with the patience of a saint, which was appropriate, since patience was one of his more saintly qualities.</p>
<p>Bellerophon sat. The horse’s back was warm beneath him, and the warmth was different from the warmth of a mortal horse; it was deeper, steadier, emanating not from the surface of the skin but from somewhere inside, from the core of the creature, from whatever served as the engine of its extraordinary life-force. The muscles beneath him were dense and hard, coiled with a potential energy that he could feel through his thighs and his seat, the way you can feel a spring that has been compressed and is waiting to be released.</p>
<p>He adjusted his seat. He gathered the reins, the golden reins, which were lighter than they looked and which transmitted, through his hands, a faint vibration that was the horse’s heartbeat, slow and strong and steady, a rhythm that was not the rapid, excitable rhythm of a mortal horse but something deeper and more measured, the rhythm of a creature whose heart has been beating since the age of heroes and shows no sign of stopping.</p>
<p>“All right,” he said. “All right.” He was talking to himself as much as to the horse, the words a self-assurance, a steadying, the verbal equivalent of planting your feet before a strong wind.</p>
<p>Pegasus walked. Forward, around the spring, across the clearing, a slow, easy walk that was not testing but acquainting, the horse learning the weight and balance of the rider, the rider learning the rhythm and movement of the horse. The walk was smooth, smoother than any horse Bellerophon had ever ridden, and he realized, with a horseman’s appreciation for biomechanics, that this was because Pegasus’s movement was not purely quadrupedal; there was a component of the movement that came from the wings, even folded, a stabilizing element that adjusted and compensated for the rider’s weight with a precision that no mortal horse’s body could match. It was like sitting on a platform that was mounted on a gyroscope, stable and level regardless of the terrain beneath it.</p>
<p>They walked around the clearing twice. Three times. Bellerophon felt the horse beneath him, and the horse felt the rider above, and the golden bridle connected them, and through the connection flowed information, a continuous, two-way stream of data that was not verbal but physical, communicated through pressure and weight and tension and the thousand small, unconscious adjustments that a rider and a horse make to each other’s bodies when they are learning to move as one.</p>
<p>The horse trotted. The trot was faster than a mortal horse’s trot, covering more ground with each stride, but it was no less smooth, the same gyroscopic stability absorbing the impact and translating it into forward motion with an efficiency that bordered on the mechanical. Bellerophon posted to the trot, rising and falling with the rhythm, and the rhythm was easy to find, the golden bridle transmitting the timing of each stride through his hands and into his body like a metronome, and within half a circuit of the clearing he was synchronized, his body moving with the horse’s body as though they were not two separate organisms but one, a single entity operating in a state of coordination so complete that the concept of “rider” and “horse” became, if not meaningless, at least insufficient.</p>
<p>The horse cantered. The canter was a revelation. It was not the rocking, three-beat gait of a mortal horse, with its characteristic lurch and its tendency to throw the rider forward at the moment of suspension. It was something more like floating, a series of long, effortless bounds that covered the ground with the leisure of a creature for whom the ground was merely a convenience, a surface to push off from rather than a surface to run along. At the canter, the wings began to unfold, just slightly, spreading outward from the body like petals opening on a flower, and the shimmering, not-quite-material substance of the wings caught the air and the light and produced that sound again, that humming, harmonic, mathematical sound, and the sound was the horse singing, Bellerophon realized, singing not with his voice but with his wings, the way a harp sings not with its throat but with its strings.</p>
<p>And then, without warning, without preamble, without the gradual buildup of speed that mortal flight (in birds, in bats, in the imagination of humans who have dreamed of flying since the first human looked up and wondered) requires, Pegasus ran, and the running was not running but launching, a single explosive stride that compressed all the coiled, patient, waiting energy in that extraordinary body into a single impulse that was directed not forward but upward, and the ground, which had been a constant, a given, the one reliable surface in Bellerophon’s entire life, simply fell away.</p>
<div class="section-break">
✦   ✦   ✦
</div>
<p>The lurch of the takeoff was the most physically violent sensation Bellerophon had ever experienced. Not painful, not exactly, but absolute, total, a full-body event that involved every muscle, every bone, every organ, every nerve in his body simultaneously contracting and then releasing as the horse’s hindquarters drove downward and the wings, fully spread now, each one wider than the horse was long, beat downward in a single, massive, air-displacing stroke that produced a sound like a thunderclap and a force like a wave, and the ground dropped, and the sky opened, and Bellerophon’s stomach, which had been his faithful companion for seventeen years, briefly and emphatically parted company with the rest of his body.</p>
<p>He gripped the mane. He gripped the reins. He gripped with his thighs and his calves and his ankles, every point of contact between his body and the horse’s body becoming a grip, a hold, a desperate, instinctive, entirely necessary anchor against the impossible, terrifying, exhilarating fact that he was no longer on the ground.</p>
<p>The wings beat again. And again. Each stroke drove them higher, and with each stroke the world below became smaller, the clearing shrinking from a place to a patch, the spring becoming a bright dot, the cliff becoming a white line, the trees becoming a green smear. The air changed. It became cooler, sharper, thinner, and it tasted different, not of pine and limestone and river-water but of something cleaner, something purer, the taste of air that has never been breathed, that has been sitting at altitude since the world was made, waiting, with the patience of all unclaimed things, for someone to come up and claim it.</p>
<p>Bellerophon looked down. The valley of the Xanthus was spread below him like a map, green and gold and brown, the river a silver thread winding south toward the invisible sea, the palace a tiny collection of white dots on a terrace of rock, the farms and fields and roads that had seemed, from ground level, so large and so important, reduced to the patterns they had always been but that only the gods, from their heights, could see: geometric, ordered, human, small.</p>
<p>He looked up. The sky was above him, the real sky, not the flat, painted ceiling that the ground-bound see when they look up but the actual sky, which is not a surface but a depth, an infinite, featureless, blue-beyond-blue depth that has no ceiling and no walls and no edges, a space so vast and so empty that the mind, accustomed to the comfortable boundaries of rooms and streets and horizons, reels at the encounter, because the sky does not end, it simply continues, upward and outward and further and further until the blue darkens to indigo and the indigo darkens to black and the black is not emptiness but the universe, the entire universe, stars and planets and galaxies and the spaces between galaxies, all of it up there, all of it accessible, all of it waiting.</p>
<p>The wind hit him. It was not the gentle breeze of the surface, the domesticated wind that ruffles hair and cools skin and carries the scent of flowers. It was the real wind, the upper wind, the wind of altitude, and it was cold and fast and relentless, a river of air moving at a speed that would have been terrifying if there had been time to be terrified, but there was not time, because the wind was not separate from the experience of flight but part of it, an element, a component, the medium through which Pegasus moved the way a fish moves through water, not fighting it but using it, riding its currents and its eddies and its invisible highways with the instinctive, effortless expertise of a creature that was born to the air the way mortal horses were born to the earth.</p>
<p>They climbed. The wings beat in a steady, powerful rhythm, each stroke carrying them higher, and the rhythm became, as Bellerophon’s body adjusted to it (the body adjusts faster than the mind; the body is, in many ways, braver than the mind, willing to commit to experiences that the mind is still debating), a kind of music, a deep, physical percussion that he felt in his chest and his hips and his thighs, and the music was not regular but varied, responding to the air and the altitude and the wind and the temperature with a sensitivity that was, Bellerophon realized, the horse’s equivalent of the constant adjustments that a sailor makes to sail and rudder, reading the wind and responding to it in real time, a continuous, fluid, endlessly dynamic conversation between creature and element.</p>
<p>They reached the top of the climb. The wings stopped beating. They spread, wide and flat, catching the air, and Pegasus glided, and the gliding was the opposite of the climb: where the climb had been effort and force and the violent assertion of will against gravity, the glide was surrender, release, the body relaxing into the air and letting the air do the work, and the silence, after the percussive beating of the wings, was so sudden and so complete that Bellerophon thought, for one disorienting moment, that he had gone deaf.</p>
<p>He had not gone deaf. He had gone somewhere else entirely, somewhere beyond the reach of ordinary hearing, a place where the only sound was the wind and the only sensation was speed and the only thought was: this. This is what it feels like. This is what it means. This is what the dream was about, all those years, all those nights, the white horse and the sky-blue eyes and the recognition and the waiting: it was about this. This moment. This experience. This flight.</p>
<p>He looked down. The world was very far away. It was also very beautiful, in the particular way that things are beautiful when seen from a great height, when the details dissolve and the patterns emerge and you realize that the world, which from ground level is a chaotic, confusing, often ugly collection of individual objects and individual experiences, is, from above, a design, a composition, a work of art whose beauty is visible only to those who can rise high enough to see it whole.</p>
<p>The mountains of Lycia spread to the north, their peaks white with snow, their slopes dark with forest, and between them the valleys lay like green folds in a vast, rumpled cloth. To the south, the sea, a flat, dark, limitless blue that met the sky at the horizon in a seam so perfect it was invisible, as though the sky and the sea were one thing, one great encircling blue, and the land was merely an interruption, a temporary wrinkle in the smooth, infinite surface of the water-sky. To the east, more mountains, rising higher, the mountains of inland Anatolia, their peaks lost in cloud. To the west, the coastline, curving and jagged, coves and headlands and the white lines of surf on the rocks, and beyond the coast, the open sea, and beyond the open sea, somewhere beyond the curve of the earth, Greece, and Corinth, and the grave of a brother whose golden hair was ash now, whose warm eyes were dust, whose voice was silence.</p>
<p>Bellerophon wept again. The tears came and the wind took them, blowing them off his face before they could fall, and the tears were not sadness; they were the response of a human body and a human heart to an experience that was, in the most literal sense of the word, transcendent: going beyond, rising above, leaving the ground and everything that the ground meant (gravity, weight, limitation, the heavy, inescapable, earth-bound condition of mortality) and entering a realm that was, until this moment, reserved for gods and birds and the imagination of children who did not yet know that the sky was supposed to be unreachable.</p>
<p>The sky was not unreachable. He was in it. He was of it. He was, for this moment, a creature of the air, as fully and completely a part of the sky as a fish is part of the sea, and the sky received him without judgment, without condition, without the complex negotiations of host and guest and the sealed letters of kings. The sky simply opened and let him in, and the letting-in was grace, pure grace, the unearned, undeserved, freely given gift of something so much larger than himself that the concept of “deserving” was irrelevant.</p>
<p>Pegasus banked. The left wing dropped, the right wing rose, and the world tilted, and Bellerophon felt his body lean into the turn the way a rider’s body leans into a turn on the ground, instinctive, automatic, the body knowing what to do before the mind could formulate the instruction. They turned north, toward the mountains, and Pegasus began to descend, not diving but spiraling, a long, lazy, descending spiral that carried them down through the layers of the atmosphere like a leaf falling through water, and each layer was different: the cold, thin, silent layer at the top, where the blue was darkest and the sun was brightest and the world was smallest; the middle layer, where the wind was strongest and the clouds, when there were clouds, lived; the lower layer, where the air thickened and warmed and began to carry with it the smells and sounds of the world below, pine and dust and the distant barking of dogs and the faint, precious, heartbreakingly beautiful sound of human voices, talking and laughing and going about the business of their small, ground-bound, mortal lives.</p>
<div class="section-break">
✦   ✦   ✦
</div>
<p>They landed in the clearing by the spring. The landing was, like the takeoff, a physical event of considerable violence: the hindquarters dropping, the wings braking, the hooves striking the earth with an impact that jarred Bellerophon’s spine and rattled his teeth. But the violence was brief, and the moment the hooves were on the ground, the ground was solid, and the ground was real, and the world was the world again, ordinary and heavy and close, and the sky, which had been, moments ago, his element, his home, his birthright, was once again a painted ceiling, flat and distant and unreachable.</p>
<p>Except that it was not unreachable. Not anymore. Not ever again. Because he had been there. He had been in the sky, on the back of a divine horse, and the experience was inside him now, as permanent and as transformative as the experience of killing his brother, but opposite in every way: where the killing had closed something, the flying had opened it; where the killing had added weight, the flying had subtracted it; where the killing had made the world smaller and darker, the flying had made it larger and brighter and fuller and more possible than he had ever imagined.</p>
<p>He dismounted. His legs were shaking (the muscles of the inner thigh, accustomed to the demands of terrestrial riding, had been subjected to forces that they were emphatically not designed for, and they were lodging their complaint in the form of a fine, persistent tremor that would continue, he discovered, for the better part of two days). He stood beside Pegasus and placed his hand on the horse’s neck, and the neck was warm, and the muscle beneath the skin was vibrating with the residual energy of the flight, and the horse’s breathing was deep and slow and even, the breathing of a creature that has done something extraordinary and is, with the equanimity of the divine, entirely unsurprised by it.</p>
<p>“Thank you,” Bellerophon said. The words were inadequate. Every word was inadequate. Language had been invented by ground-bound creatures to describe ground-bound experiences, and what had just happened was not a ground-bound experience; it was the negation of ground-boundness, the refutation of the entire premise on which human language was based, and the only appropriate response was silence, but silence was not something Bellerophon could manage right now, because his heart was too full and his mouth was too close to it.</p>
<p>Pegasus turned his head and looked at him. The blue eyes were calm. The blue eyes were always calm. And in them, Bellerophon saw, for the first time, not a reflection of himself but a version of himself, a possibility of himself, the self he might become if he could learn to live in the space between the ground and the sky, between the human and the divine, between the man who had killed his brother and the man who had ridden a flying horse, between the weight of his past and the lightness of his future.</p>
<p>It was a lot to see in a pair of eyes. But they were very large eyes, and they were very blue, and they had a great deal of room.</p>
<p>The evening light was fading. The clearing was growing dark, the shadows of the cedars reaching across the grass like long fingers. The spring bubbled, unchanged, eternal, doing the thing it had always done and would always do, regardless of who came to drink from it or what happened to them afterward.</p>
<p>Bellerophon did not remove the bridle. He was not sure whether he should (Athena had not provided instructions for post-flight bridle management, which was, he felt, an oversight, though it was perhaps unreasonable to expect a goddess to concern herself with the operational details of equine tack). He left it on, and Pegasus did not seem to object, and the golden metal gleamed softly in the fading light, and the bridle was, he understood now, not a restraint but a bond, a physical expression of the connection between them, the connection that had existed since before they met, since before Bellerophon was born, since before Pegasus emerged from his mother’s blood, a connection that was written into the fabric of the world the way the paths of rivers are written into the landscape, invisible from the ground but obvious, undeniable, from above.</p>
<p>He sat down beside the spring. Pegasus stood beside him. The horse’s great body was a wall of warmth and light between Bellerophon and the coming darkness, and the warmth was not merely physical but emotional, spiritual, the warmth of companionship, of partnership, of the knowledge that you are no longer alone in a world that has, until this moment, been characterized primarily by loneliness.</p>
<p>Tomorrow, he would have to face the Chimera. Tomorrow, the reality of the task that Iobates had set for him would reassert itself, and the sealed letter’s demand would have to be answered, one way or another. Tomorrow, the ground would reclaim him, and the weight of his obligations and his guilt and his history would settle back onto his shoulders, and the sky, which had been his for one brief, miraculous, life-changing afternoon, would return to its position overhead, a ceiling rather than a floor.</p>
<p>But that was tomorrow. Tonight, there was the spring, and the clearing, and the horse, and the last light of the day painting the white cliff in shades of gold and rose, and the stars coming out one by one, appearing in the darkening sky like notes appearing on an empty page of music, and the silence, which was not empty but full, full of the sound of two heartbeats, one human and one divine, beating in the darkness, not quite in unison but close, closer than they had been this morning, closer than they would be tomorrow morning, closer than any two heartbeats from two such different worlds had any right to be.</p>
<p>Bellerophon closed his eyes. He did not dream. For the first time in as long as he could remember, he did not need to dream. The dream had come true. The white horse was beside him, and the golden bridle was on the horse, and the sky was above them, and the sky, at last, was reachable.</p>
<p>He slept. The horse stood guard. The spring bubbled. The stars turned on their great, slow, indifferent axes, and the world, which does not care about the destinies of men or horses or the distances between the ground and the sky, continued its ancient, endless, beautiful rotation, carrying everything, all of it, the sleeping man and the standing horse and the golden bridle and the white cliff and the spring and the mountains and the sea and the palace and the sealed letter and the memory of a dead brother and the promise of a living monster, around and around and around, into the next day, and the next, and the next, forever.</p>
</div>
<div class="chapter">
<div class="chapter-header">
<span class="chapter-label">— Chapter Eight —</span>
<section id="the-chimera" class="level2 chapter-title">
<h2 class="chapter-title">The Chimera</h2>
</section>
</div>
<p>The mountain had been burning for three days when Bellerophon first saw it, and even from a distance of several leagues, riding the coastal road with the salt wind at his back, the wrongness of it was apparent. Mountains did not burn like that. Forests burned, yes, in the dry summers when the pines grew brittle and a single spark from a shepherd’s fire could send a whole hillside up in orange fury; villages burned, sometimes, in the ugly way that villages burn when armies pass through them; but mountains themselves, the bare rock and ancient stone of them, did not catch fire and stay lit for days on end, sending up columns of black smoke that leaned against the sky like pillars holding up some darker, more terrible ceiling than the blue one the gods had made. Yet there it was: Mount Cragus, or what remained of it, wreathed in smoke and punctuated by gouts of flame that erupted from crevices and cave mouths with a regularity that suggested not wildfire but breath. Something on that mountain was breathing fire, and it had been breathing fire for long enough that the shepherds had abandoned the lower slopes, the goatherds had fled with whatever animals they could gather, and the road that wound through the pass between Cragus and its sister peak had been declared impassable by every merchant, soldier, and traveller who had attempted it in the last four months.</p>
<p>Iobates had explained all of this with the careful, measured tone of a man describing a problem he expected someone else to solve, which was, Bellerophon reflected, precisely what he was doing. The King of Lycia had spent nine days feeding his guest on roasted meats and honeyed wine, had opened the sealed tablet from Proetus with fingers that trembled only slightly, had read whatever was written inside (and Bellerophon still did not know what those words said, though he had begun to suspect they were not complimentary), and had arrived at his present solution with the smooth efficiency of a man who had been making difficult decisions for thirty years and had learned that the best way to handle an impossible situation was to make it someone else’s impossible situation.</p>
<p>“The Chimera,” Iobates had said, turning the word over in his mouth as though tasting it, “has been a problem for some time.”</p>
<p>This was, Bellerophon thought, rather like saying that the ocean was somewhat damp. The Chimera had not merely been a problem; it had been a catastrophe. It had killed fourteen soldiers sent against it in three separate expeditions, burned two villages to ash and cinder, devoured a herd of cattle so thoroughly that nothing remained but scorched bones and the stink of cooked meat that lingered in the valley for weeks, and established itself on Mount Cragus with the territorial certainty of a creature that knew, with whatever passed for thought in its mismatched skull, that nothing in the world below could touch it. The mountain passes were closed. Trade between the coastal cities and the interior had slowed to a trickle, with merchants forced to take routes that added weeks to their journeys. Farmers in the foothills had abandoned their land. The Chimera had, in the space of a single season, done what no army could have accomplished: it had cut Lycia in half.</p>
<p>“I would consider it a great service,” Iobates had continued, with the elaborate courtesy of a man asking someone to die, “if you would rid my kingdom of this creature.”</p>
<p>Bellerophon had agreed, because what else could he do? He was a guest. He was a stranger in this land, dependent on the king’s hospitality, bound by the obligations that hospitality imposed. And he had Pegasus. He had the winged horse, the impossible creature, the gift of the gods, and if that gift was not meant for a task like this, then what, precisely, was it meant for? To carry him from feast to feast? To impress stable boys and make old men gasp? No. Pegasus was a weapon, or rather, Pegasus was the means by which a weapon could be delivered to a place where no weapon had ever reached before, and the Chimera, whatever else it might be, was a creature that lived on the ground, which meant that it could be attacked from the sky.</p>
<p>This had seemed like sound reasoning in the comfort of Iobates’s hall, with a cup of wine in his hand and a fire in the hearth (a tame fire, a civilized fire, a fire that stayed where it was put and did not chase you across open ground). It seemed rather less sound now, as Bellerophon stood on the last ridge before the mountain and watched the smoke coil upward and heard, carried on the wind, a sound that was not quite a roar and not quite a hiss and not quite a bleat but somehow all three at once, layered on top of each other like three voices singing different songs from the same throat.</p>
<p>Because the Chimera had three throats, or near enough. That was the thing about it. That was the thing that made hardened soldiers go pale and priests mutter prayers and old women make the sign against evil when its name was spoken. It was not merely a monster; it was an impossibility, a violation of the natural order so profound that looking at it too long was said to drive men mad, not from fear (though there was plenty of that) but from the sheer incomprehensibility of what they were seeing. A lion’s head, tawny and massive, with a mane that was perpetually singed at the tips and eyes the color of heated bronze, sat atop a body that was not a lion’s body but a goat’s, barrel-chested and powerful, covered in coarse dark hair that smelled, according to survivors, of sulfur and burning wool. And from the hindquarters, where a tail should have been, there emerged instead a living serpent, thick as a man’s thigh, scaled in patterns of black and green, with its own head and its own eyes and its own will, so that the creature was not one beast but three, a grotesque trinity of predators fused together by whatever dark craft or divine malice had brought it into being.</p>
<p>And it breathed fire. Not the metaphorical fire of a fast horse or a passionate lover, but actual fire, real fire, fire that leaped from the lion’s jaws in streams of orange and white, fire that could melt bronze and crack stone and turn a man in full armor into a screaming, flailing torch in the space of a single breath. The goat body produced the fuel, some said, some combustible substance manufactured in its gut the way a goat might produce milk, and the lion’s head ignited it and directed it with the precision of a skilled archer. The serpent tail, meanwhile, struck at anything that approached from behind, its fangs dripping with a venom that killed in minutes. There was, in short, no safe angle of approach. Front: fire. Sides: the raking claws. Rear: the serpent. Above…</p>
<p>Above was the only direction from which the Chimera had never been attacked, because nothing that lived in Lycia could attack from above. Until now.</p>
<div class="section-break">
✦   ✦   ✦
</div>
<p>Pegasus knew something was wrong before they had even begun the ascent. The horse’s nostrils flared, pulling in the acrid, sulfurous air, and his wings, which had been beating in the smooth, steady rhythm that Bellerophon had come to find as natural as his own heartbeat, stuttered for a moment, a single missed beat that sent a shiver through the horse’s great body. Bellerophon leaned forward and placed a hand on Pegasus’s neck, feeling the muscles taut beneath the white coat, feeling the heat of the blood beneath the skin, and whispered words that were not quite language, the sounds a rider makes to a horse when both of them are afraid and neither of them wants to admit it.</p>
<p>They rose. The ground fell away: first the ridge with its sparse pines, then the valley below it, then the patchwork of abandoned farms and empty fields that marked the Chimera’s territory as clearly as a line drawn on a map. From above, you could see the destruction in patterns. The burn marks radiated outward from the mountain like the spokes of a wheel, each one marking a sortie, a hunt, a moment when the Chimera had descended from its lair to feed or simply to burn, because burning seemed to be something it did for pleasure as much as necessity, the way a cat will kill a mouse it does not intend to eat just for the satisfaction of the killing.</p>
<p>The wind shifted as they climbed higher, carrying with it the smell of the mountain: hot stone, ash, sulfur, and beneath it all something organic and deeply unpleasant, the smell of a carnivore’s den, of old meat and old bones and the particular rancid sweetness of an animal that eats other animals and does not clean up after itself. Bellerophon tightened his grip on the golden bridle, feeling the metal warm in his hands, feeling the connection between his will and the horse’s will that the bridle made possible, that bridge between human thought and equine instinct that Athena’s gift had built.</p>
<p>He saw the cave first. It was halfway up the mountain’s eastern face, a wide, dark mouth in the rock, and around it the stone was blackened and cracked in patterns that looked almost deliberate, almost like writing, as though the fire had been trying to spell something in a language that only stone could read. Bones littered the approach: cattle bones, horse bones, the smaller, more disturbing bones of things that had once walked upright. The ground before the cave was bare and scorched, a killing field of ash and ember, and in the center of it, in a shaft of afternoon sunlight that fell through a gap in the smoke, the Chimera lay sleeping.</p>
<p>Bellerophon had been told what to expect. He had listened to the descriptions, had nodded, had filed the information away in the practical, soldier’s part of his mind. But seeing the thing itself was different from hearing about it, in the way that hearing about the sea is different from standing waist-deep in it and feeling the current pull at your legs. The Chimera was larger than he had imagined, for one thing. The lion’s head alone was the size of a horse’s body, and the mane, despite its singed and matted condition, framed a face of such savage beauty that for a moment Bellerophon understood why ancient peoples had worshipped lions, had carved them in stone and gold and placed them at the gates of their cities. There was something regal about that face, even in sleep. Something that commanded not just fear but a kind of terrible respect.</p>
<p>The goat’s body beneath it was less noble but more disturbing, because it was so ordinary. It was a goat’s body, nothing more and nothing less, the kind of body you might see in any flock on any hillside in any part of the world, and the ordinariness of it made the wrongness worse, the way a familiar word becomes strange and frightening if you repeat it enough times. The body rose and fell with the creature’s breathing, each exhale accompanied by a thin wisp of smoke from the lion’s nostrils, and the dark hair along its flanks rippled in a breeze that was not wind but the heat of its own body, radiating outward in waves.</p>
<p>And the tail. The serpent tail. Bellerophon watched it for a long time from the safety of the sky, circling on Pegasus at a height that he hoped was beyond the reach of fire, and the tail was the worst part because it never slept. Even as the lion’s eyes remained closed and the goat’s body lay still, the serpent was awake, its head moving in slow, sinuous arcs, its tongue flickering, tasting the air. It knew they were there. Bellerophon was certain of it. The serpent’s eyes, black and liquid and utterly without warmth, tracked their circle with the patient attention of a predator that is not hungry enough to hunt but is always, always ready.</p>
<p>Bellerophon checked his weapons. He had his spear, the long cavalry lance that he had carried from Corinth, and at its tip he had bound a lump of lead, a heavy, dull-gray mass the size of a man’s fist. The lead had been Iobates’s suggestion, offered with the diffidence of a man who is not a warrior but who has been thinking about a problem for a long time and has arrived at a theory he is not entirely confident about. “If you could get it into the creature’s mouth,” the king had said, turning the lump of lead over in his hands, “the fire should melt it. And melted lead, poured down a throat…” He had not finished the sentence. He had not needed to.</p>
<p>It was clever. It was the kind of cleverness that came from desperation, from months of watching his kingdom burn and knowing that swords and arrows and brave men on foot were not enough. Fight fire with fire was the old saying, but Iobates had improved upon it: fight fire with something that fire transformed into a weapon. Use the Chimera’s own breath against it. Turn its greatest strength into the instrument of its death.</p>
<p>The only difficulty, of course, was getting a lump of lead into the mouth of a creature that could incinerate you from thirty paces.</p>
<div class="section-break">
✦   ✦   ✦
</div>
<p>The first pass was a disaster. Bellerophon brought Pegasus down in a steep dive, the wind screaming in his ears, the ground rushing up like a fist, and the Chimera, roused from its sleep by the shadow that passed over it (or by the serpent tail’s warning, that flickering tongue having tasted their approach), was on its feet and burning before Bellerophon had closed half the distance. The fire came up in a column, not a stream but a solid pillar of flame that split the air with a roar like a furnace door opening, and the heat of it, even at the edge, even as Pegasus banked hard to the left and the fire passed beneath them like a river of light, was enough to singe the hair on Bellerophon’s arms and make Pegasus scream, a sound that Bellerophon had never heard the horse make before, a sound that was not quite equine and not quite human but somewhere in between, the sound of a creature that had been born from the blood of a god and was, for the first time in its existence, afraid.</p>
<p>They climbed. The fire followed them, the column bending, tracking their ascent with a precision that spoke of intelligence behind the flame, and Bellerophon felt the heat on his legs, on his back, on the soles of his sandals, and for a terrible, suspended moment he thought they were not going to make it, that the fire was going to catch them and consume them and add their bones to the collection around the cave mouth. But Pegasus was faster than fire, barely, and the column reached its limit and fell back, and they were above it, circling, breathing hard, alive.</p>
<p>Below, the Chimera watched them with all three of its faces. The lion’s eyes blazed with fury. The serpent’s eyes tracked them with cold calculation. And the goat’s body, the absurd, ordinary, impossible goat’s body, shifted its weight and settled into a stance that was unmistakably defensive, the stance of an animal that expects to be attacked again and is ready for it.</p>
<p>Bellerophon circled. He thought. He was not, by nature, a man who planned elaborately; his instincts were a fighter’s instincts, honed in the sparring yards of Corinth, sharpened on the streets and roads of exile, and those instincts told him to go straight, to go fast, to close the distance and strike before the enemy could react. But those instincts were designed for fighting men, and the Chimera was not a man. The Chimera was something else entirely, something that had been killing men who relied on exactly those instincts for months, and if Bellerophon wanted to succeed where they had failed, he needed to think differently.</p>
<p>He needed to think like the creature. He needed to understand its fire. The fire was not infinite; nothing was infinite. The column had a range, perhaps forty paces upward, and it had a duration, perhaps ten heartbeats of sustained flame before the lion’s head needed to draw breath and the goat’s body needed to produce more fuel. Those pauses were the windows. Those gaps between the breaths were the spaces through which death could be delivered.</p>
<p>He brought Pegasus around for a second pass, but this time he did not dive. Instead, he came in low and fast from the east, using the mountain itself as cover, keeping the ridge between them and the Chimera until the last possible moment. The creature heard them, or the serpent felt them, because the great body swung around to face the east, and the lion’s mouth opened, and the fire came, but it came a moment too late, angled slightly wrong, because the Chimera had been expecting an attack from above and Bellerophon had come from the side, and the fire passed behind them, behind and below, and for a single, crystalline instant Bellerophon had a clear line to the creature’s flank.</p>
<p>He threw a javelin. Not the spear with the lead; he was not ready for that yet, not confident enough in his aim, not willing to waste the one weapon that might actually end this on a throw he was not certain of. He threw a javelin, and it struck the goat’s body in the shoulder, sinking deep into the muscle, and the Chimera screamed. All three voices screamed: the lion’s roar, the goat’s bleat, the serpent’s hiss, all at once, a chord of agony that echoed off the mountain and sent rocks tumbling from the crags above. And the fire came again, wild and unfocused this time, spraying in all directions like water from a shaken jug, and Bellerophon pulled Pegasus up and away and thought: yes. It could be hurt. It was mortal. It bled. The blood was dark, almost black, and it steamed where it hit the ground, but it was blood, and where there was blood there could be death.</p>
<p>They circled. The Chimera pulled the javelin from its shoulder with its forepaw, the lion’s head gripping the shaft in its teeth and wrenching it free with a motion that was disturbingly humanlike in its dexterity, and the wound bled freely for a moment before the dark blood clotted and stopped. The creature was watching the sky now with a new intensity, all three heads oriented upward, and Bellerophon could see it learning, adapting, adjusting its defensive posture. It backed toward the cave mouth, narrowing the angles from which it could be approached. It lowered its center of gravity, the goat’s legs bending, ready to spring in any direction. The serpent tail coiled and uncoiled, a constant, restless motion that covered the rear approach.</p>
<p>Clever. The thing was clever. Not intelligent in the way a man was intelligent, but clever in the way a predator was clever, possessed of a cunning that was older than language and more reliable than thought. It was learning from the fight, and if Bellerophon gave it enough time, it would learn too well, would find a pattern in his attacks that it could predict and counter. He needed to end this soon.</p>
<div class="section-break">
✦   ✦   ✦
</div>
<p>The third pass was the one that mattered. Bellerophon had been watching the fire, counting the heartbeats between bursts, and he had found the rhythm: ten heartbeats of flame, then a pause of four or five while the lion’s head drew breath and the goat’s body rumbled and churned, producing the next load of fuel. Four heartbeats. That was his window. Four heartbeats to close the distance, make the strike, and pull away.</p>
<p>He brought Pegasus straight down from above, directly above, the one angle the Chimera could not cover without lying on its back and exposing its belly, which it would not do because no predator exposes its belly. They fell like a stone, like a bolt of lightning, and the wind tore at Bellerophon’s face and the golden bridle sang in his hands and Pegasus’s wings were folded tight against his body and they were falling, falling, and the Chimera looked up and the lion’s mouth opened and the fire came.</p>
<p>It came straight up in a column of blinding white heat, and Pegasus spread his wings and banked, hard, harder than he had ever banked before, and the fire passed so close that Bellerophon smelled his own hair burning, smelled the leather of his armor crisping, felt the blisters rising on his left arm where the heat had kissed the skin, and then the fire stopped. The pause. The four heartbeats.</p>
<p>One.</p>
<p>Pegasus dove. Straight down. No angle, no evasion, just a plummeting, screaming descent toward the upturned face of the lion, the open mouth that was drawing breath for another blast, the throat that was dark and wet and wide as a doorway to death.</p>
<p>Two.</p>
<p>Bellerophon raised the spear. The lead lump at its tip was heavy, unbalancing, and the spear wobbled in his grip, and he tightened his fingers until the knuckles went white and the muscles in his arm screamed and the point steadied, aimed at the open mouth below, the red darkness of the throat.</p>
<p>Three.</p>
<p>The serpent struck. It came from below and behind, faster than anything that size should have been able to move, and Bellerophon saw it at the last moment, saw the black-and-green scales and the gaping jaws and the fangs that glistened with venom, and he twisted in the saddle and the serpent’s mouth snapped shut on empty air an inch from his thigh, and the motion of twisting saved his life and ruined his aim, and the spear, instead of going straight into the lion’s mouth, struck the lower jaw and skidded upward along the bone.</p>
<p>Four.</p>
<p>The spear caught on the lion’s upper lip. The lead lump, by some miracle, by some intervention of the goddess whose golden bridle glowed warm in Bellerophon’s other hand, slipped between the teeth and lodged in the back of the throat just as the lion’s mouth closed on the shaft and bit through it like a dog biting a stick. The spear snapped. Bellerophon was left holding a broken shaft. And the Chimera’s mouth was closed, and inside it, wedged in the soft tissue of the throat where the fire was born, sat a lump of lead the size of a man’s fist.</p>
<p>Pegasus pulled up. The serpent struck again and missed. The goat body reared, and the lion head shook, confused, bothered by the foreign object in its throat, and then the fire came.</p>
<p>But the fire did not come out. The fire came inward, as it always did, igniting in the back of the throat where the combustible gases met the spark of whatever internal mechanism produced the flame, and the lead was there, sitting in the fire’s birthplace, and the lead melted.</p>
<p>Lead melts at a temperature far lower than fire burns. This was the simple, brutal physics that Iobates had understood and that the Chimera, for all its predatory cunning, could not have anticipated. The lead melted and became liquid, became a stream of molten metal that poured down the Chimera’s throat, coating the soft tissue, filling the passages through which fire and air traveled, sealing them shut with a substance that cooled and hardened even as it killed, so that the Chimera’s throat became a pipe of lead, a sealed tube through which nothing could pass, not fire, not air, not breath.</p>
<p>The Chimera’s death was not quick. Bellerophon wished afterward that it had been. The creature staggered, the lion’s mouth opening and closing in silent gasps, the fire guttering and dying like a torch plunged into water. The goat body convulsed, muscles spasming, legs buckling and straightening and buckling again. The serpent tail thrashed wildly, striking at nothing, at the air, at its own body, as though trying to tear itself free from the dying whole. The Chimera fell on its side, and its legs kicked, and its eyes, the lion’s eyes that had been the color of heated bronze, dimmed and went dark, and a sound came from it that was not a roar or a bleat or a hiss but something else, something that might have been, if you were inclined to hear it that way, a kind of sigh, the exhalation of a creature that had been at war with the world since the moment of its misshapen birth and was, at last, too tired to fight anymore.</p>
<p>Bellerophon circled above on Pegasus and watched the Chimera die, and he felt many things, but the strongest among them, the one that surprised him, was pity. Not for the creature’s cruelty, which had been real and terrible, but for its condition, which had been none of its choosing. The Chimera had not asked to be three things at once. It had not asked to carry within a single body the warring natures of lion and goat and serpent, to be driven by three sets of instincts that could never fully harmonize, to be monstrous not by choice but by construction. It had been assembled from incompatible parts and set loose in a world that had no place for it, and it had done what any creature so constituted would do: it had raged, and burned, and destroyed, because destruction was the only language available to a being that could not be at peace with itself.</p>
<p>He thought of his own fragmented nature, the parts of himself that did not fit together smoothly: the prince and the exile, the penitent and the warrior, the boy who had loved his brother and the man who had killed him. He thought of how those pieces ground against each other, how the friction between them produced not fire but something almost as destructive, a restless, consuming energy that drove him forward because standing still meant feeling the edges where the pieces did not align. He had imposed order on the Chimera’s chaos, yes, but he recognized the chaos, recognized it the way you recognize your own face in a dark mirror, not clearly but unmistakably.</p>
<p>The Chimera lay still. The smoke from its nostrils thinned and stopped. The serpent tail gave one last, feeble twitch and was still. The fire was out. The mountain, for the first time in months, was quiet.</p>
<div class="section-break">
✦   ✦   ✦
</div>
<p>He cut off the lion’s head. It was gruesome work, made worse by the heat that still radiated from the creature’s body, and by the smell, which was indescribable, a miasma of burned flesh and sulfur and something sweet and rotten that seemed to coat the inside of his throat and settle in his stomach like a stone. The head was enormous, heavier than he had expected, and getting it onto Pegasus’s back required an effort that left him gasping and shaking, his burned arm screaming, his muscles trembling with exhaustion. But he got it up, lashed it behind his saddle with leather straps, and rose from the mountain with the Chimera’s head as his trophy, its dead eyes staring back at the body it had left behind, its mane dripping ichor onto Pegasus’s white flanks.</p>
<p>The flight back to Iobates’s city took the rest of the afternoon. Bellerophon flew low, following the river, and as he passed over the abandoned farms and empty villages, he saw people emerging from their hiding places: a woman in a doorway, shading her eyes against the sun; a boy on a rooftop, pointing and shouting; an old man on his knees in a field, his hands raised in a gesture that might have been supplication or thanks or simple disbelief. The news traveled faster than he did. By the time he reached the city, the streets were full.</p>
<p>They cheered. Of course they cheered. He had killed the unkillable thing, the monster that had closed their roads and burned their fields and made their children afraid to sleep. He had done what no man on foot could do, what no army with bronze shields and iron courage could do, and he had done it alone, on a winged horse, descending from the sky like something out of the old stories, the very old stories, the ones that the grandmothers told about heroes and gods and the time before the world was ordinary. He was, for this one evening, in this one city, something more than a man. He was the answer to a prayer.</p>
<p>Iobates received the head in his great hall. He looked at it for a long time, this trophy that proved what he had secretly hoped would not be proved, that the stranger from Corinth was not merely a man but a man favored by the gods, a man who could not be casually disposed of, a man who would have to be dealt with in some other way. The king’s face betrayed nothing; it was the face of a man who had been playing political games since before Bellerophon was born, and whose expressions were as carefully managed as his treasury. But his eyes, if you knew where to look, if you had the particular sensitivity that comes from growing up in a court where a misread glance could mean exile or worse, held something that was not quite admiration and not quite fear but existed in the uneasy territory between them.</p>
<p>“You have done Lycia a great service,” the king said.</p>
<p>“I was glad to be of use,” Bellerophon replied, which was what you said in these situations, the polite formula, the expected response. What he did not say, what he kept locked behind his teeth like a secret, was that the gladness was real, that the killing had felt not just necessary but right, that somewhere in the screaming descent and the thrust of the spear and the terrible intimacy of putting his weapon into a living creature’s mouth, he had found something he had been looking for since Corinth, since the blood on the stone, since the day he became a killer. He had found a use for the killer. He had found a purpose for the part of himself that he feared most, the part that could end a life without hesitation, and the purpose was this: not murder but heroism, not destruction but salvation, not the chaos of Deliades’s death but the order of the Chimera’s.</p>
<p>He had, for the first time in years, a reason to be what he was.</p>
<p>Iobates ordered a feast. There was wine and roasted meat and songs that the court poets composed on the spot, hurried verses in the old heroic meter, full of epithets and divine interventions and the kind of exaggeration that turns a terrified, burned, half-blind spear thrust into a moment of godlike precision. Bellerophon drank and ate and accepted the praise with a modesty that was mostly genuine, and if he noticed that Iobates watched him through the evening with the calculating attention of a man revising a plan, he did not mention it. He was alive. The Chimera was dead. Tomorrow could worry about itself.</p>
<p>But later that night, alone in the guest quarters, his arm bandaged and his burns slathered with the honey-and-herb poultice that the palace physician had prepared, Bellerophon lay awake and thought about the Chimera’s eyes. Not the lion’s eyes, which had burned with fury and then gone dark. Not the serpent’s eyes, which had been cold and calculating to the end. The other eyes. The goat’s eyes. He had not seen them during the fight, had not looked for them, had been too focused on the mouths (the fire-mouth and the venom-mouth) to pay attention to the face that had no weapon, the face that was merely an animal, a simple, domestic animal, caught up in a body that was not its own, dragged into a war that was not its fight.</p>
<p>The goat’s eyes, he imagined, had been afraid. Not fierce. Not calculating. Just afraid, the way any goat is afraid when the world becomes loud and hot and full of danger. And the goat had died with the lion and the serpent, had been killed along with the killers, because that was the nature of the Chimera: its parts could not be separated, could not be saved individually, could not be judged on their own merits. The innocent part died with the guilty parts, because they shared a body, and a body is either alive or it is not.</p>
<p>He thought about this for a long time in the darkness of the Lycian night, listening to the sounds of celebration that still drifted up from the city below, and he decided, eventually, that it meant nothing. It was a monster. He had killed a monster. That was what heroes did. The goat’s eyes were a detail, a stray thought, the kind of thing that came to a tired man in a dark room after a day of violence, and he would forget about it by morning.</p>
<p>He did not forget about it by morning, but he learned, over the days and weeks that followed, to stop thinking about it, which was almost the same thing, or at least close enough to let him sleep.</p>
<p>And Iobates, in his own chambers, reviewed his options and began to plan the next impossible task.</p>
</div>
<div class="chapter">
<div class="chapter-header">
<span class="chapter-label">— Chapter Nine —</span>
<section id="the-solymi" class="level2 chapter-title">
<h2 class="chapter-title">The Solymi</h2>
</section>
</div>
<p>The Solymi had been fighting since before the Lycians had a word for war. They lived in the mountains to the north, in stone villages perched on ridges so narrow and so high that an eagle might have envied them their nesting grounds, and they had defended those ridges against every army, every alliance, every ambitious king who had looked up at the peaks and thought, as ambitious kings always think, that what lay beyond them ought to belong to him. They had defeated the Lycians. They had defeated the Carians. They had defeated, according to their own songs (and the Solymi had many songs, all of them loud and most of them about killing), a coalition of five coastal kingdoms that had marched into the mountains with ten thousand men and marched out again, three weeks later, with fewer than four thousand, leaving the rest scattered across the passes in various states of dismemberment. The mountains belonged to the Solymi, and the Solymi knew how to use them the way a swordsman knows how to use a sword: every ridge a parry, every valley a feint, every narrow defile a thrust that could pin an advancing column against the rocks and slaughter it at leisure.</p>
<p>Iobates explained this with the same careful, measured tone he had used when describing the Chimera, which Bellerophon was beginning to recognize as the king’s particular way of saying, “I expect you to die doing this, but courtesy forbids me from mentioning it.”</p>
<p>“They have been raiding the northern settlements,” Iobates said, spreading a map across the table and anchoring its corners with bronze cups. “Three villages burned in the last season. Grain stores taken. Livestock driven off. The garrison at Phellos cannot hold them; they come down from the mountains, strike, and retreat before the soldiers can form a line.”</p>
<p>Bellerophon studied the map. The northern border of Lycia was a jagged line of mountain ranges, each one higher and more forbidding than the last, and the passes through them were few and easily defended. An army marching north would be funneled into those passes, compressed into long, vulnerable columns, exposed to attack from above, from the sides, from positions so well-fortified by nature that a handful of men with rocks could hold off a thousand. It was, from a military standpoint, a nightmare. The kind of terrain that generals lost sleep over and poets wrote elegies about.</p>
<p>“How many men will you give me?” Bellerophon asked, though he already suspected the answer.</p>
<p>“I was hoping,” Iobates said, with the delicacy of a man stepping around a puddle, “that you might not need any.”</p>
<p>Bellerophon looked at the king. The king looked at the map. Neither of them said what both of them were thinking, which was that Iobates was sending him against an entire tribe of mountain warriors without support, without reinforcements, without a line of retreat, and that this was not a military strategy but an execution with extra steps.</p>
<p>“I will need Pegasus,” Bellerophon said.</p>
<p>“Of course,” said Iobates, and something behind his eyes, something old and calculating and not entirely unkind, relaxed by a fraction. The winged horse was the variable that changed everything. The Chimera had proved that. A man on a flying horse was not a man; he was a force of nature, a phenomenon, something outside the normal calculus of war. And Iobates, who was a pragmatist before he was anything else, had calculated that this particular force of nature was either going to solve his Solymi problem or be destroyed by it, and either outcome would serve his purposes, the purposes that the sealed letter from Proetus had set in motion.</p>
<div class="section-break">
✦   ✦   ✦
</div>
<p>He flew north at dawn on a morning when the sky was the color of beaten copper and the mountains stood against it like teeth in a jaw. Pegasus climbed easily, the great wings finding the thermals that rose from the warming stone, spiraling upward in wide, lazy circles that carried them higher than the ridges, higher than the peaks, high enough that the world below became a map of itself, a flat, abstract rendering in brown and green and the white thread of rivers, and Bellerophon, looking down, felt something shift inside him, something subtle and dangerous, like the first crack in a dam that would not break today or tomorrow but would, eventually, give way.</p>
<p>The view from above was different from the view from the ground. This was obvious, of course, the kind of thing a child could tell you, but the difference was not merely one of perspective; it was one of relationship. On the ground, you were part of the world. The world pressed against you from all sides, its rocks and trees and rivers and people crowding in, demanding attention, demanding that you negotiate and compromise and accommodate yourself to their existence. From above, the world was something you looked at, something that existed below you, something that you had, by the simple act of rising, transcended. The people in the villages were small. The soldiers in the garrisons were small. The Solymi in their mountain fortresses, those fearsome, unconquerable warriors who had broken every army that had dared to climb toward them, were small. Everything was small when you were high enough, and smallness, Bellerophon was discovering, made things easier to think about in certain ways that were convenient and in other ways that were deeply, fundamentally wrong.</p>
<p>He found the first Solymi village on the second day, nestled in a valley between two ridges, hidden from the sight of anyone approaching on foot by a series of natural ramparts that turned the village into a kind of natural fortress. Smoke rose from cooking fires. Goats moved along the terraced fields that the Solymi had carved into the mountainsides with the patient labor of generations. Children played in a stream that tumbled down from the heights, their shouts carrying up to him as thin, bright sounds, like the cries of birds.</p>
<p>From above, it did not look like an enemy stronghold. It looked like a village. It looked like any village, anywhere, in any kingdom, a collection of stone houses and terraced fields and cooking fires and children, and if Bellerophon had been standing at its edge, on foot, at eye level, he might have felt the awkwardness of what he was about to do, might have recognized the people below him as people, might have hesitated.</p>
<p>But he was not on foot. He was in the sky. And from the sky, the village was not a collection of people; it was a target.</p>
<p>He did not attack the village. Not that first one. He was not, despite the shift that was happening inside him, despite the subtle, seductive distortion that altitude was working on his perception, a cruel man. He attacked the Solymi’s military positions: the watchtowers on the ridges, the fortified defiles where they kept their ambush parties, the supply caches hidden in caves along the mountain trails. He attacked from above, where their defenses did not reach, dropping boulders that he carried in a leather sling (Pegasus complained about the weight but bore it, as he bore everything, with a patience that seemed less equine than divine), swooping low to hurl javelins into positions that had never been approached from the air before and were, consequently, not built to defend against attack from that direction.</p>
<p>The first watchtower fell before the men inside it understood what was happening. They heard the beating of wings, which they took for a large bird, and then a boulder the size of a man’s chest crashed through the timber roof and killed two of the three men inside. The third ran out into the open, looked up, saw Pegasus against the sky, white and terrible and impossible, and died with an expression on his face that was less fear than astonishment. Bellerophon’s javelin took him in the throat, and he fell backward into the rubble of his own watchtower, and that was the end of the eastern observation post of the Solymi’s northern defense line.</p>
<p>It took three days to destroy the defensive positions along the first ridge. Three days of systematic, methodical devastation, working from east to west, tower by tower, cache by cache, while the Solymi below scrambled to respond to a threat they had never imagined and could not counter. They sent archers to the high points, but Bellerophon flew higher. They lit signal fires to warn neighboring villages, but the warnings arrived too late; by the time the smoke was read, the watchtowers were already falling. They tried to move their forces under cover of darkness, but Pegasus could see in the dark (or seemed to, his great eyes catching starlight and moonlight in ways that suggested a vision more acute than any mortal horse’s), and Bellerophon struck at night as easily as by day, the sound of wings in the darkness becoming, over those three days, a sound that the Solymi learned to dread the way the Lycians had learned to dread the Chimera’s fire.</p>
<p>By the fourth day, the first ridge was his. By the seventh day, the second. By the tenth, the Solymi were in retreat, pulling back to their deepest, highest, most remote positions, and Bellerophon pursued them, pressing the advantage, because that was what you did in war: you found the enemy’s weakness and you exploited it until there was nothing left to exploit. That was what he told himself, anyway. That was the version of events that fit into the narrative he was constructing, the narrative of the dutiful warrior carrying out his king’s orders, defending the northern settlements, punishing the raiders.</p>
<p>But there was another narrative, a darker one, running beneath the first like a subterranean river, and in that narrative, the truth was simpler and uglier: it felt good. The killing felt good. Not the blood itself, not the screams, not the sight of men dying in the wreckage of their own fortifications; those things were terrible, and Bellerophon knew they were terrible, in the same distant, detached way that you know a fire is hot when you are standing far enough away from it to feel only warmth. What felt good was the power. The absolute, unchallenged, godlike power of a man who could strike from the sky and could not be struck back. The Solymi were brave. They were fierce. They were, in their own way, magnificent, warriors born and bred, men who did not run from a fight, who met death with defiance, who died with their weapons in their hands and their war cries on their lips. But none of that mattered, because they could not reach him. Their courage was irrelevant. Their skill was irrelevant. Their generations of mountain-fighting expertise were irrelevant. He was above them, and they could not get above him, and the gap between above and below was the gap between life and death, between power and powerlessness, between the hammer and the nail.</p>
<div class="section-break">
✦   ✦   ✦
</div>
<p>There was a moment, on the eighth day, that Bellerophon would remember long afterward, though he would not understand until much later what it meant, what it had been trying to tell him about the direction in which he was traveling.</p>
<p>He was attacking a fortified position on a ridge that the Solymi called the Spine of the Wolf, a narrow crest of rock that connected two peaks and commanded the only pass through the third range of mountains. The position was strong: stone walls, a timber palisade, a garrison of perhaps fifty men. From the ground, it would have taken an army of five hundred to assault it, and the assault would have cost half of them their lives. From the air, it took Bellerophon one morning.</p>
<p>He came in from the west, using the sun at his back to blind the sentries. He dropped three boulders in rapid succession, destroying the palisade gate and collapsing the corner of the stone wall. Then he swept low, javelin in hand, and killed the archers who had been too slow to take cover. The remaining Solymi formed a shield wall in the center of the compound, their long spears pointed upward like the quills of a threatened animal, and they stood their ground, because that was what Solymi did, what they had always done, what their fathers and grandfathers had done when the armies of the coast came climbing toward them.</p>
<p>Bellerophon hovered above them on Pegasus (the horse could hover, if that was the right word for it, hanging in the air with a rapid, almost hummingbird-like beating of his wings that held them stationary against the wind) and looked down at the shield wall and felt, for a single, vertiginous moment, something that was not triumph but a kind of nauseous recognition. He had seen this before. Not this specific scene, not these specific men, but this configuration: a group of people with nowhere to go, with no chance of victory, with nothing left to them but the dignity of the stance and the cold comfort of dying together. He had seen it in Corinth, in the slums below the palace, where men who had lost everything stood in doorways and watched the prince ride past with expressions that were not anger but the absence of hope, which is worse. He had seen it in the eyes of exiles on the road, men like himself, men who had been cut loose from the world and left to drift. He had seen it in his brother’s eyes, in the instant between the blow and the fall, that fraction of a second when Deliades had understood what was happening and had known that there was nothing to be done about it.</p>
<p>The Solymi stood in their shield wall and waited for death, and Bellerophon, looking down from the sky, from the position of absolute power that was also the position of absolute isolation, thought: I should feel something. I should feel something right now that I am not feeling, and the fact that I am not feeling it is important.</p>
<p>But the thought passed. Thoughts like that, inconvenient thoughts, thoughts that threatened the narrative of heroism and duty and justified violence, had a way of passing when you were busy, when there was work to do, when the next target was already on the horizon. Bellerophon dropped another boulder into the center of the shield wall, and the formation broke, and the killing was quick after that, and by noon the Spine of the Wolf belonged to no one, because the men who had held it were dead and the man who had taken it did not want it; he wanted only to have taken it, which was a different thing entirely.</p>
<p>He flew on. The next ridge. The next village. The next impossible task made possible by the simple, terrible fact that the horse could fly.</p>
<p>There was a boy among the dead at the Spine of the Wolf. Not a child, exactly; he was perhaps sixteen, old enough to hold a spear and stand in a shield wall, old enough by Solymi reckoning to be a warrior, but young enough that the downy beginnings of a beard still clung to his jaw in patches and his hands, curled around the shaft of his weapon even in death, had the smooth, uncallused look of hands that had not yet done enough work to be marked by it. The boy had died facing upward, which meant he had been looking at Pegasus when the boulder fell, and his expression, frozen by death into a permanence that the living face would never have sustained, was not fear or defiance or any of the emotions that the poets ascribed to dying warriors. It was curiosity. The boy had been curious about the flying horse. He had been looking up at it with the particular intensity of a young person encountering something impossible, something that violated every rule he had been taught about the world and how it worked, and the curiosity had been stronger, in that final moment, than the fear, and the curiosity was still there, on the dead face, in the open eyes, asking a question that would never be answered because the person asking it was gone and the person who could have answered it was already climbing toward the next ridge, the next battle, the next exercise in the mathematics of power, which does not include a variable for the curiosity of dead boys.</p>
<p>Bellerophon did not see the boy. He was too high. From his altitude, the bodies on the Spine of the Wolf were shapes on the ground, dark shapes on lighter ground, distinguishable from rocks only by a certain softness of outline and a certain way that the shadows fell around them, and the distinction was academic, the kind of thing you noticed and filed away and did not think about, because thinking about it would require descending, not physically but psychologically, back to the level where shapes became people and people had faces and faces had expressions and expressions had meanings that you would have to carry with you for the rest of your life. Altitude was, Bellerophon was learning, a marvelous defense against meaning. The higher you went, the less things meant. The less things meant, the easier they were to do. And the easier they were to do, the more you did them, and the more you did them, the higher you needed to go to maintain the defense, and the cycle, which had the neat, self-reinforcing structure of all the best and worst human habits, turned and turned and carried him upward.</p>
<div class="section-break">
✦   ✦   ✦
</div>
<p>The war, if it could be called a war (and it could not, really, because a war implies two sides with roughly comparable means of killing each other, and this was more like a storm arguing with a landscape), lasted fourteen days. At the end of it, the Solymi were broken. Their defensive positions were rubble. Their supply lines were cut. Their warriors, those who survived, had retreated to the highest, most inaccessible peaks, to places where not even Pegasus could comfortably fly, where the air was thin and the winds were treacherous and the cold bit through leather and wool like a blade. They were alive but defeated, and the difference between the two conditions was, for a warrior people, negligible.</p>
<p>Bellerophon returned to Iobates’s city on the fifteenth day, and the city, which had cheered for the Chimera’s head with uncomplicated joy, received him this time with something more complex. There were cheers, yes, but they were mixed with a different quality, a note of something that was not quite fear but was adjacent to it, the way you might admire a storm for its beauty while being glad you are watching it from indoors. The man who had killed the Chimera had been a hero, a savior, a slayer of monsters. The man who had broken the Solymi was something else. He was a force. He was a weapon. And weapons, as everyone who has ever lived near one knows, are things you are grateful for when they are pointed at your enemies and nervous about when they are not pointed at anything at all.</p>
<p>Iobates received the news with the studied calm of a man who has learned to hide surprise behind ceremony. He hosted a feast. He offered praise. He gave Bellerophon gold and bronze and the thanks of a grateful kingdom. And behind his eyes, behind the mask of royal courtesy, the king was thinking, calculating, revising his estimates of what this man was and what this man could do and how, given what the sealed letter required of him, he was going to solve the problem that Bellerophon was becoming.</p>
<p>Because Bellerophon was becoming a problem. Not because he was dangerous (though he was, more dangerous than Iobates had believed possible), and not because he was disobedient (he was scrupulously, almost excessively obedient, carrying out each task with the earnest competence of a man who believes that service will lead to acceptance), but because he was succeeding. He was doing the things that were supposed to kill him, and he was doing them easily, and each success made him more visible, more celebrated, more beloved by the people, and a beloved stranger in a king’s court is a kind of threat that no walls can defend against. The people were beginning to say his name the way they said the names of gods: with reverence, with awe, with the particular quality of devotion that attaches not to what a man has done but to what a man is, or what the people believe a man to be, which is never quite the same thing.</p>
<p>Bellerophon himself was aware of none of this, or rather, was aware of it only as a pleasant warmth, the warmth of approval, of belonging, of having a place in the world again after years of displacement. He had been a prince, and then an exile, and then a supplicant, and now he was becoming something else, something that had no name yet, something that existed in the space between a man and a story, and the space, it must be said, was comfortable. More comfortable than the ground. Almost as comfortable as the sky.</p>
<p>He went to the stables that evening to tend to Pegasus. This was a ritual he had maintained since the taming, a private hour each day when he groomed the horse and checked his wings for strain and spoke to him in the low, murmuring voice that horses (even divine ones) find soothing. Pegasus stood quietly under his hands, those great dark eyes half-closed, the wings folded tight against his flanks, and Bellerophon worked the comb through the white mane and thought about the Solymi.</p>
<p>He thought about the shield wall on the Spine of the Wolf. He thought about the men who had stood inside it, their spears raised, their faces set, waiting for the death that was coming from above. He thought about the sound a boulder makes when it hits a shield wall, which is not a single sound but many: the crack of the wood, the clang of the bronze, the sound that human bodies make when they are struck by something much heavier than themselves, a sound that is both duller and wetter than you would expect if you had never heard it before.</p>
<p>He thought about these things, and then he stopped thinking about them, because thinking about them was unpleasant, and unpleasant thoughts were a luxury that a man in his position could not afford. He was a hero. He was doing a hero’s work. The Solymi were raiders and killers, enemies of the kingdom that had given him shelter, and defeating them was not murder but duty, not cruelty but necessity. These were the arguments, and they were good arguments, solid and reasonable and supported by a logic that was, as far as it went, unassailable.</p>
<p>The trouble was the phrase “as far as it went.” Because it did not go far enough. It did not reach the place where the shield wall stood, the place where men with spears waited for boulders from the sky, the place where courage and skill and the traditions of generations meant nothing against a man on a flying horse. Logic could justify the act; logic could not undo the fact that the act had felt, in the moment, not like duty or necessity but like crushing insects, and that the ease of it, the terrible, intoxicating ease of it, was the thing that should have frightened Bellerophon and did not, because fright requires the recognition that something is wrong, and Bellerophon, at this point in his story, was still capable of telling himself that everything was right, was heroic, was exactly what it was supposed to be.</p>
<p>Pegasus shifted under his hands, and Bellerophon resumed the grooming, and the stable was quiet, and outside the night came down over Lycia like a lid being placed on a jar, and somewhere in the mountains to the north, in the thin, cold air of the highest peaks, the surviving Solymi built fires in caves and did not sing their songs, because the songs were about victory and they had no victory to sing about, and silence, for a people who had always had songs, was its own kind of death.</p>
<div class="section-break">
✦   ✦   ✦
</div>
<p>That night, Bellerophon dreamed. He dreamed of the temple where Athena had come to him, the cold stone floor and the smell of incense and the goddess’s voice, clear and precise as a bell, telling him things he needed to know. But in the dream, the temple was different. The columns were broken. The altar was cracked. The incense had gone out, and the smoke that lingered was not sweet but acrid, the smoke of burning villages, the smoke of burning men.</p>
<p>Athena stood before him, but she did not speak. She only looked at him, and her gray eyes, which he remembered as being cool and intelligent and faintly amused, were now something else. Not angry. Not disappointed. Something worse than either of those: concerned. As though she were watching something happen that she had foreseen but hoped would not come to pass, a possibility that had been present from the beginning, embedded in the gift she had given him like a flaw in a jewel, invisible until the light hit it at just the right angle.</p>
<p>He tried to speak to her, to ask what was wrong, but when he opened his mouth, no words came. Instead, he heard wings. The sound of wings, beating in the darkness, growing louder, and the dream dissolved into that sound, into the rhythmic, powerful sweep of feathers through air, and Bellerophon woke in the dark with the sound still echoing in his ears and a feeling in his chest that was not quite guilt and not quite grief but something that partook of both, something he could not name and therefore could not address, could not examine, could not bring into the light where it might have been understood and, understanding, might have changed the direction of everything that was to come.</p>
<p>He lay in the dark and listened to his own breathing and told himself it was just a dream.</p>
<p>In the morning, Iobates summoned him, and the king’s face held a new expression, something that looked, if you squinted and were generous, like apology, but was more accurately described as the expression of a man who is running out of ways to kill someone and is becoming creative in his desperation.</p>
<p>“There is one more thing,” the king said.</p>
<p>Bellerophon waited.</p>
<p>“The Amazons,” said Iobates, and for the first time, something in his voice betrayed the weight of what he was doing: sending a man he had fed and sheltered and watched kill a monster and break a nation against yet another enemy, stacking impossible tasks like stones on a scale, waiting for the one that would tip the balance and bring the stranger down. “They have been… troublesome. Along the eastern border.”</p>
<p>Bellerophon nodded. He did not ask why. He did not ask what the Amazons had done, or whether they truly posed a threat, or whether this was another test designed to end in his death. He had stopped asking those questions somewhere between the Chimera’s cave and the Solymi’s ridges, had lost the habit of questioning and replaced it with the habit of doing, which is a more efficient habit but a more dangerous one, because doing without questioning is the mechanism by which good men become instruments of purposes that are not their own.</p>
<p>“I will leave at dawn,” he said.</p>
<p>And he did.</p>
</div>
<div class="chapter">
<div class="chapter-header">
<span class="chapter-label">— Chapter Ten —</span>
<section id="the-amazons" class="level2 chapter-title">
<h2 class="chapter-title">The Amazons</h2>
</section>
</div>
<p>The Amazon country lay to the east, beyond the river Xanthus, beyond the scrublands where the pines gave way to dry grass and the dry grass gave way to stone, in a territory that the maps in Iobates’s hall left largely blank except for a single notation in the cartographer’s small, careful hand: “Here dwell the women who fight.” It was, Bellerophon thought as he flew eastward over the changing landscape, a curiously neutral description for a people who had, according to every story he had ever heard, built something that should not have existed: a civilization without men. Or rather, not without men entirely (the Amazons were, after all, human, and the mechanics of reproduction required certain unavoidable contributions), but without men in any position of authority, decision, or significance. The men who existed in Amazon society existed at its margins, performing tasks that the women considered beneath their attention, and the arrangement, which would have been incomprehensible in Corinth or Argos or Lycia, seemed to function with an efficiency that suggested it was not an aberration but an alternative, a different answer to the question of how human beings might organize themselves if they started from different premises.</p>
<p>None of which mattered, because Iobates had said “defeat them,” and Bellerophon had said “I will leave at dawn,” and here he was, flying toward a war he had not asked for against a people he did not hate, carrying out the orders of a king who, Bellerophon was beginning to suspect without quite acknowledging the suspicion, was trying to get him killed.</p>
<p>He had been given no army, which was becoming a pattern. Iobates provided information, logistics, the polite fiction of royal authority (“You go as my representative, with my full blessing and the thanks of Lycia”), and then sent Bellerophon off alone on Pegasus to fight battles that should have required hundreds of soldiers. It was, when you stepped back and looked at it objectively, absurd. One man against the Chimera. One man against the Solymi. One man against the Amazons. The mathematics of it made sense only if you factored in the horse, and even then, only if you accepted that a man on a flying horse was no longer quite a man but something else, something that belonged to a different category of being, a category in which the normal rules of warfare did not apply.</p>
<p>Bellerophon was beginning to accept this. That was the danger.</p>
<div class="section-break">
✦   ✦   ✦
</div>
<p>He found them on the third day: a city, or something like a city, a permanent settlement of stone buildings and paved streets and defensive walls that had been built not by slaves or conscripts but by the same people who defended them, women with callused hands and straight backs and the particular look of competence that comes from doing hard things for a long time and knowing, without vanity, that you are good at them. The city sat in a valley between two rivers, a natural fortress supplemented by human engineering, with watchtowers at the cardinal points and a wall that was not high (it did not need to be, against the enemies the Amazons typically faced) but was thick, built to withstand siege, built to last.</p>
<p>Bellerophon circled the city at a height that kept him out of arrow range and studied it with the tactical eye that he had been developing over the last several weeks, the eye that saw terrain as opportunity, that saw walls as problems to be solved, that saw people as units in a calculation. It was a good eye. It was an efficient eye. It was the eye of a man who has learned to look at the world from above and has begun, without realizing it, to look at everything from above, even when his feet are on the ground.</p>
<p>The Amazons saw him. Of course they saw him; these were a people whose survival depended on vigilance, on seeing the threat before the threat became a crisis, and a white horse circling in the sky was not the sort of thing that escaped notice. Horns sounded from the watchtowers, a sequence of notes that Bellerophon recognized as an alert pattern, and within minutes the city was in motion, women streaming from buildings with weapons in their hands, forming up in the practiced, unhurried way of people who have drilled for this, who have practiced the transition from peace to war so many times that it has become as automatic as breathing.</p>
<p>He watched them form their defensive lines and felt, for the first time since the Chimera, a twinge of something uncomfortable. The Solymi had been warriors, yes, but they had been raiders too, men who came down from the mountains to burn and steal, men whose aggression had given Iobates a legitimate grievance, a reason (or at least a pretext) for the war that Bellerophon had waged against them. The Amazons were different. The Amazons were in their own city, on their own land, behind their own walls, and whatever “troubles” they had caused along Iobates’s eastern border were, Bellerophon suspected, the kind of troubles that exist in the eye of the beholder, the kind that have more to do with the beholder’s ambitions than with any genuine threat.</p>
<p>But he had accepted the task. He had said “I will leave at dawn,” and he had left at dawn, and here he was, and the machinery of war, once set in motion, does not pause for moral reflection. This was something Bellerophon had learned in the mountains with the Solymi, a lesson that had been taught to him not by any teacher but by the cumulative weight of his own actions: once you start killing, the killing develops its own momentum, its own logic, its own justification, and stopping requires a kind of effort that becomes harder with each day, each battle, each death, because stopping means looking at what you have done, and looking at what you have done means feeling what you have done, and feeling is the thing that altitude makes unnecessary.</p>
<p>He did not stop.</p>
<div class="section-break">
✦   ✦   ✦
</div>
<p>The Amazon queen was a woman named Otrera, or so Bellerophon would learn later, when the fighting was over and the dead had been counted and the survivors had been gathered in the ruins of what had been, that morning, a functioning city. Otrera was tall, broad-shouldered, with hair the color of dark iron and eyes that held the particular quality of someone who has been responsible for other people’s lives for a very long time and has learned that responsibility is not a burden you carry but a structure you inhabit, a house you build around yourself that shapes every thought, every decision, every moment of every day. She was, by any measure, a remarkable person, the kind of person who, in a different story, in a story told from a different angle, would have been the hero.</p>
<p>But this was not her story. This was Bellerophon’s story, and in Bellerophon’s story, Otrera was the enemy, which meant that her qualities, however admirable, were relevant only insofar as they made her a more difficult enemy to defeat, which they did, because a queen who is loved by her people is a queen whose people will fight to the death to protect her, and people who fight to the death are the hardest kind of people to beat.</p>
<p>The battle began at midday. Bellerophon had spent the morning studying the city’s defenses, identifying the weak points (there were few), planning his approach (there were fewer options than there had been with the Solymi, because the Amazon city was on flat ground and there were no ridges to use as cover), and steeling himself for what he was about to do, which required, he found, more steeling than the Chimera or the Solymi had required, though he could not have said exactly why.</p>
<p>Actually, he could have said why, if he had been willing to be honest with himself, which at this point in his story he was not. The Chimera had been a monster. The Solymi had been raiders. The Amazons were a people, a civilization, a way of life, and destroying them was not monster-slaying or border defense but conquest, pure and simple, the imposition of one kingdom’s will on another people’s existence, and Bellerophon, for all his growing comfort with the view from above, was not yet so far gone that he could do this without feeling the wrongness of it pressing against him like a hand on his chest.</p>
<p>He did it anyway.</p>
<p>The first pass destroyed the watchtower on the eastern wall. Bellerophon came in fast and low, the way he had learned to attack in the mountains, and dropped a boulder that struck the tower at its base and brought the whole structure down in a cascade of stone and timber and the screams of the women who had been standing on its platform with bows drawn and arrows nocked and expressions of fierce, terrified determination on their faces. The tower fell, and the wall cracked, and the Amazons on the ground surged toward the breach, not running away from it but toward it, filling the gap with their bodies and their shields, because that was what you did when your wall was broken: you became the wall.</p>
<p>Bellerophon admired this. He admired it in the distant, aestheticized way that a man admires something beautiful through glass, something he can see but not touch, something that exists on the other side of a barrier that he has chosen, or that has been chosen for him, by the simple fact of his elevation. The Amazons were brave. The Amazons were magnificent. The Amazons were also, from his position in the sky, targets, and the transformation of people into targets was the fundamental operation of his new way of seeing, the operation that made everything else possible.</p>
<p>The battle lasted until evening. The Amazons fought with everything they had: bows, spears, slings, the fury of women defending their homes and their children and their way of life. They adapted faster than the Solymi had, learning within the first hour to spread out rather than cluster, to use the buildings as cover, to fire upward in coordinated volleys that forced Pegasus to climb higher and higher, reducing Bellerophon’s accuracy but also, crucially, reducing his ability to see them as individuals. From high enough up, an archer is just a dot. A volley of arrows is just a pattern. A woman dying in the rubble of her own watchtower is just a change in the pattern, a dot that was there and then was not.</p>
<p>They nearly hit him twice. The first time, an arrow passed so close to Pegasus’s belly that it left a thin red line along the white coat, a scratch that bled for a moment and then stopped, and Pegasus lurched sideways with a sound of outrage that was almost comically indignant, the sound of a creature that cannot quite believe that something so small and so far below it has dared to draw its blood. The second time, a sling stone struck Bellerophon’s shield with a force that nearly tore it from his grip, and he looked down and saw, on the ground below, a woman with a sling in her hand and an expression on her face that was not fear or desperation but pure, concentrated hatred, the hatred of someone who sees clearly what is being done to her and her people and who will not, even in the face of certain defeat, accept it.</p>
<p>He killed her. He threw a javelin and it struck her in the chest and she fell, and the hatred on her face did not change as she fell; it remained fixed, permanent, an expression that death could not alter because it was not an emotion but a fact, the fact of what he was doing, written on a human face in a language that required no translation.</p>
<p>There were other moments, scattered across the long afternoon like stones dropped into water, each one sending ripples outward that Bellerophon refused to feel. A group of women, perhaps a dozen, who had formed a defensive circle around a building that was smaller than the others, lower-roofed, with painted walls and a garden that had been trampled in the fighting. They fought with a ferocity that exceeded anything the other defenders had shown, and Bellerophon, circling above, understood after a moment why: the building was a nursery. He could hear, beneath the clash of weapons and the shouts of the fighters, the thin, high sound of children crying, and the sound reached him in a way that the other sounds of battle did not, reached him through the armor of altitude and distance and the narrative of duty, reached him in the place where Bellerophon was still, despite everything, a human being who recognized the sound of children in distress, and the recognition was like a hand reaching up from the ground and seizing him by the ankle, trying to pull him down, trying to drag him back to the level where sounds had meanings and meanings had consequences and consequences had weight.</p>
<p>He pulled away. He climbed higher, high enough that the nursery was a square among squares and the women were dots among dots and the crying was swallowed by the wind. He did not attack the nursery. This was the concession he made, the compromise between what the task required and what his diminishing humanity could tolerate: he would destroy the walls, he would defeat the warriors, he would break the city, but he would not attack the nursery. The distinction was thin, perhaps, the line between what he would do and what he would not do drawn so close to the edge of the possible that a strong wind could have blown it over, but it was there, and its being there was something, and the something was all that Bellerophon had left of the man he had been, the man who had refused Stheneboea and carried the sealed letter unopened and wept for his brother in the rain of exile, the man whose capacity for goodness had not yet been entirely consumed by the intoxicating, corrosive, addictive experience of power without consequence.</p>
<p>Bellerophon turned away and climbed higher and told himself, again, that this was war, that this was duty, that this was the task he had been given and the task he would complete, because completing tasks was what he did, was what he was for, was the purpose that the Chimera had revealed and the Solymi had confirmed and the Amazons would not be allowed to contradict.</p>
<div class="section-break">
✦   ✦   ✦
</div>
<p>By evening, the city was taken. “Taken” was the word that would be used in the reports, in the official language of military communication, and it was a clean word, a bloodless word, a word that concealed the reality it described the way a bandage conceals a wound. In reality, the taking had involved the destruction of the eastern and southern walls, the burning of the granary (an accident; a dropped torch, or a deliberate fire set by the Amazons themselves to deny their stores to the enemy, Bellerophon was never sure), the deaths of perhaps a hundred women, and the wounding of many more. The survivors had been driven from the city into the scrubland beyond, where they gathered in groups and watched from a distance as the thing they had built burned and fell.</p>
<p>Bellerophon landed Pegasus in the central square of the city, a paved space surrounded by buildings that were, some of them, still standing, and dismounted, and stood for a moment in the wreckage, and felt the ground under his feet with a shock that was almost physical, the shock of returning to a world that had weight and texture and smell after hours in the clean, abstract space of the sky. On the ground, things were different. On the ground, you could see the blood. You could see the broken walls and the smashed doors and the personal belongings scattered in the streets, the things that people carry when they run from their homes and drop when running becomes more important than carrying: a clay pot, painted with flowers; a child’s doll, made of rags; a bronze mirror, cracked across its face, reflecting nothing but fragments.</p>
<p>He walked through the city. He told himself he was conducting a survey, assessing the damage, confirming that the resistance was broken, all the practical, military reasons for walking through a conquered city. But the truth was that he was looking, really looking, at what he had done, seeing it from the ground for the first time, seeing it at eye level instead of from above, and the difference between the two perspectives was the difference between reading about a wound and touching one.</p>
<p>He found the queen in a building near the western wall. Otrera had been wounded in the fighting; an arrow (one of his javelins, he realized with a sickness that he swallowed quickly and firmly) had struck her in the thigh, and she had retreated to this building, which might have been a temple or a council chamber, and she was sitting against the wall with her leg bound in torn cloth and her sword across her knees and an expression on her face that was not defeat.</p>
<p>It was something worse than defeat. It was understanding. She looked at Bellerophon and she understood him, understood what he was and what he was becoming, and her understanding was more damaging than any arrow, because it came from the ground, from the human level, from the perspective that he had been leaving behind with every flight, and it told him something about himself that he did not want to hear.</p>
<p>“You did not come here because we threatened your king,” she said. Her Greek was accented but clear, each word placed with the precision of a woman who chose her words carefully because words, like arrows, should not be wasted. “You came because he told you to come, and you no longer ask why.”</p>
<p>Bellerophon said nothing. There was nothing to say. She was right, and they both knew it, and the fact that she was right changed nothing, because rightness, like courage, like skill, like the traditions of generations, was irrelevant when you were the one on the flying horse.</p>
<p>“What will you do with us?” she asked.</p>
<p>“You are free to go,” Bellerophon said, and the words came out before he had decided to say them, propelled by something that might have been guilt or might have been the last remnant of the man he had been before the sky had begun to change him, the man who had refused a queen’s advances in Argos because honor was worth more than pleasure, the man who had carried his own death sentence across the sea because it had not occurred to him to open it, the man who, underneath the hero and the killer and the rider of the divine horse, was still, perhaps, a man.</p>
<p>Otrera looked at him for a long time. Then she stood, using the wall for support, and picked up her sword, and walked past him without another word, and the space she left behind her was colder than it should have been, as though something warm had left it, something that Bellerophon would have been glad to keep if he had known how to ask for it, which he did not, because asking required a kind of humility that altitude had almost, but not entirely, eroded.</p>
<div class="section-break">
✦   ✦   ✦
</div>
<p>The flight back to Lycia was long. Bellerophon took a circuitous route, not for tactical reasons but because he did not want to arrive, did not want to face the cheering crowds and the feast and Iobates’s careful, calculating praise, did not want to be congratulated for something that felt, now, in the quiet of the sky with only the sound of wings and the sound of wind, less like a victory and more like a crime.</p>
<p>He flew over the scrubland where the Amazons were gathering, the survivors, the women who had escaped the city with whatever they could carry, and from above they looked like ants, like dots on a map, like abstractions, and this was the comfort of altitude, this was the seduction: from high enough up, everything was abstract, everything was manageable, everything was just a pattern of dots that you could rearrange or remove without feeling the weight of what you were doing. But Bellerophon, for the first time since the Solymi, could not quite achieve the necessary height. Something kept pulling him back down, kept tugging at his attention, kept dragging his eyes to the ground, to the dots that were not dots but people, women, a civilization that he had broken because a king had told him to and he had not asked why.</p>
<p>Otrera’s words sat in his chest like a stone. “You no longer ask why.” It was true. He had stopped asking. He had stopped asking somewhere between the Chimera and the Solymi, had traded the discomfort of questions for the efficiency of action, and the trade had felt, at the time, like growth, like the maturation of a warrior, the hardening of a soul that needed to be hard in order to do hard things. But Otrera had shown him what it looked like from the other side, from the ground side, from the perspective of the people who were the objects of his efficiency, and from that perspective, it did not look like maturation. It looked like something else. Something less.</p>
<p>Pegasus flew steadily westward, the great wings beating in the rhythm that Bellerophon knew as well as his own heartbeat, and below them the land unrolled like a scroll, and Bellerophon thought about the woman with the sling, the one whose face had held hatred so pure it was almost beautiful, and he thought about the child’s doll in the street, made of rags, dropped by a child who was running, and he thought about the bronze mirror, cracked across its face, reflecting nothing but fragments.</p>
<p>He thought about these things, and he did not push them away. Not this time. He let them sit in his mind, let them occupy the space that efficiency and duty and the narrative of heroism usually filled, and they sat there, heavy and uncomfortable, and they did not resolve into anything, did not clarify into a lesson or a moral or a decision. They were just there, the way the dead are just there, the way the consequences of your actions are just there, whether you look at them or not.</p>
<p>But he did not change course. He did not fly back to the Amazon city and help rebuild the walls. He did not seek out Otrera and apologize. He did not dismount from Pegasus and walk on the ground and feel the weight and texture and smell of the world he had been destroying from above. He could have done any of these things. He chose to do none of them. And the choosing, or the not-choosing, which amounts to the same thing, carried him westward, back to Lycia, back to the king who was trying to kill him with impossible tasks, back to the story that was being written about him by forces he did not understand, and the gap between the man he was and the man he was becoming widened by another degree, another increment, another step along a path that led upward, always upward, toward a destination that looked from below like heaven and was, as all destinations that look like heaven eventually reveal themselves to be, something very different.</p>
<div class="section-break">
✦   ✦   ✦
</div>
<p>Iobates received the news of the Amazon defeat with an expression that Bellerophon had not seen on the king’s face before: something that looked, stripped of its royal composure, very much like despair. Not the dramatic despair of tragedies, not the tearing of garments and gnashing of teeth that the poets described, but a quiet, internal despair, the despair of a man who has played every card in his hand and lost every round and is running out of games to play.</p>
<p>The feast was held. The songs were sung. The people cheered. Bellerophon sat in the place of honor and ate the roasted meat and drank the honeyed wine and received the praise, and the praise was like water to a man who has been thirsty for years, like sunlight to a man who has lived in darkness, and the pleasure of it was real, was genuine, was the simple, human pleasure of being valued, of being needed, of having a place in the world. And if that pleasure was also dangerous, if it was feeding something in him that was growing too large, too hungry, too certain of its own importance, he did not notice, or he noticed and did not care, which amounts to the same thing when you are standing in the warm light of approval and the alternative is the cold dark of self-examination.</p>
<p>That night, alone in his quarters, he tried to sleep and could not. The faces were there again: the woman with the sling, the queen with her understanding, the Solymi in their shield wall, the Chimera with its three heads and three deaths. They gathered in the darkness behind his closed eyes, a gallery of the defeated, and they looked at him without accusation (accusation he could have handled, could have argued against, could have justified himself to), but with something worse: recognition. They knew him. They knew what he was becoming. They knew it better than he did, because they were seeing it from the outside, from the ground, from the perspective that distance made irrelevant but that proximity made inescapable.</p>
<p>He opened his eyes and looked at the ceiling and thought: I need to go higher. The thought came unbidden, irrational, disconnected from any practical consideration, and it frightened him, briefly, before the fright dissolved into something that felt like longing, a longing so deep and so old that it might have been born with him, might have been woven into his blood by the divine parentage he sometimes claimed and sometimes denied, the blood of Poseidon, the blood of the sea, the blood of a god who lived in the depths and had, perhaps, passed to his son a yearning for the heights that was the inverse of his own domain, a reaching upward that mirrored the sea’s reaching toward the sky.</p>
<p>He needed to go higher. Higher than the mountains. Higher than the clouds. Higher than the place where the faces could follow him, where the ground could reach him, where the weight of what he had done could press against him with its unbearable, unignorable truth. There was a place above all of that, a place where the air was clean and the sky was clear and the questions that troubled him on the ground (why did you do it, why didn’t you ask, why didn’t you stop) would become, like everything else, small, abstract, manageable. Irrelevant.</p>
<p>That place, Bellerophon knew without knowing, was Olympus. That place was where the gods lived, above the world, above the consequences, above the faces of the dead. That place was where he was meant to be.</p>
<p>But not yet. Not yet. The thought was premature, the longing was premature, the reaching was premature. There were still tasks to be done, still obligations to be met, still a king to serve and a story to complete. The sky would wait. It always waited. That was one of the things about the sky that made it so seductive: unlike the ground, which was always changing, always demanding, always pressing its complications against you, the sky was patient. The sky was eternal. The sky was there.</p>
<p>Bellerophon closed his eyes and slept, and in his sleep he flew, and the flying was effortless, and the ground below him was so far away that he could not see the faces, could not see the blood, could not see the broken walls and the scattered dolls and the cracked mirrors, and the absence of these things was not peace, exactly, but it was relief, and relief, when you have been carrying what Bellerophon was carrying, is close enough to peace to pass for it in the dark.</p>
</div>
<div class="chapter">
<div class="chapter-header">
<span class="chapter-label">— Chapter Eleven —</span>
<section id="the-ambush-and-the-flood" class="level2 chapter-title">
<h2 class="chapter-title">The Ambush and the Flood</h2>
</section>
</div>
<p>Iobates had exhausted his monsters. He had exhausted his border wars and his barbarian tribes and his impossible tasks, and Bellerophon, who should by any reasonable accounting have died three times over, was not only alive but celebrated, not only surviving but thriving, not only present in Lycia but increasingly, alarmingly, central to it. The people spoke his name in the marketplaces. The soldiers told stories of his battles in the barracks. The children played at being Bellerophon in the streets, running with their arms outstretched, pretending to fly, shouting “I am the rider of Pegasus” at each other in the bright, unselfconscious way that children adopt the heroes of their time without understanding the costs of heroism, the way candy takes the shape of the mold without understanding the heat that formed it.</p>
<p>The king sat in his private chambers, the sealed tablet from Proetus on the table before him, and considered his options with the methodical desperation of a man who is running out of room. The tablet’s message was clear, had been clear since the moment he broke the seal and read the Tirynthian king’s neat, compressed script: “Kill the bearer of this letter, for he has dishonored my wife and my house.” It was the kind of directive that, between kings, carried the weight of absolute obligation. Proetus was Iobates’s son-in-law. Stheneboea, the allegedly dishonored wife, was Iobates’s own daughter. Family honor demanded compliance. Royal protocol demanded compliance. The entire edifice of reciprocal duty and obligation that held the Greek-speaking world together demanded that Iobates find a way to kill this man who had, according to Proetus, violated the sacred bond of guest and host.</p>
<p>But the man would not die. The man killed the Chimera. The man broke the Solymi. The man defeated the Amazons. The man had a flying horse and the favor of the gods and a talent for survival that bordered on the supernatural, and Iobates, who was old enough to recognize divine intervention when he saw it, was beginning to wonder whether the sealed tablet’s message was, perhaps, not the whole story. Kings lied. Proetus was a king. It followed, with a logic that was uncomfortable but unavoidable, that Proetus might have lied.</p>
<p>But Iobates could not simply disregard the letter. He could not say, “I think my son-in-law might be lying, so I will ignore his request and risk a war between our kingdoms.” He could not say, “The man you want dead has become too useful to kill,” because that was an admission of failure, and kings did not admit failure, not to other kings, not to their own courts, not even to themselves in the privacy of their chambers with the door barred and the lamps low. Kings found solutions. Kings found ways. And Iobates, whose ways were growing fewer by the day, arrived at his last, worst, most desperate idea.</p>
<p>An ambush.</p>
<div class="section-break">
✦   ✦   ✦
</div>
<p>He chose his best men. Not the garrison soldiers, the steady, reliable men who kept order in the city and patrolled the roads and maintained the peace with the patient competence of professionals; those men were valuable, and Iobates, whatever else he was, was not wasteful. He chose instead the men who existed at the edge of his court, the men who were too dangerous for peacetime and too useful for war, the men who did the things that kings needed done but could not acknowledge needing done: the knife-fighters, the ambushers, the shadows who moved along the margins of royal power and did the work that the clean, bright center of that power preferred not to see.</p>
<p>There were thirty of them. They were placed along the road that Bellerophon would travel when he returned from the Amazon country, hidden in the rocks and brush on either side of a narrow valley where the road passed between two hills, a natural killing ground where even a man on a horse (even a flying horse, though Iobates was betting that Bellerophon would be riding on the road, not flying above it, because even heroes had to land sometime) could be overwhelmed by numbers and surprise and the advantage of concealment.</p>
<p>It was a good plan. It was the kind of plan that worked against normal men, the kind that had been working against normal men since the first king decided that a rival needed to stop being a rival. The men were in position. The road was watched. The valley was silent, the brush still, the ambush as perfectly set as a trap could be.</p>
<p>It did not work.</p>
<p>Bellerophon, returning from the east on the road that wound through the hills (and yes, he was on the ground, walking beside Pegasus rather than riding, because the horse’s wings needed rest after the long flight and because Bellerophon, despite everything, still liked walking, still found pleasure in the simple act of putting one foot in front of the other on solid ground, in feeling the earth push back against his weight with each step), saw the ambush before the ambushers knew they had been seen. This was partly luck (a reflection of sunlight off a bronze blade in the brush, a flash so brief that a less alert man would have dismissed it as a trick of the light), partly the instinct of a man who had been a fighter since boyhood and had survived long enough to develop the particular sixth sense that fighters develop, the prickling awareness that something in the landscape is not right, that the silence is not the silence of emptiness but the silence of waiting, and partly, it must be said, Pegasus. The horse stopped. The horse’s ears flattened. The horse’s nostrils flared, and the great head came up, and the dark eyes fixed on the brush where the men were hidden with a focus that was unmistakable, that said, as clearly as speech: there is danger here.</p>
<p>Bellerophon did not mount Pegasus. He did not draw his sword. He stood very still on the road, his hand on the horse’s neck, and he looked at the brush, and the men in the brush looked back at him (those who were close enough to see his face), and what they saw on that face was not fear or surprise or even anger. What they saw was something that would haunt several of them for the rest of their lives, something that the bravest among them would describe, later, to their companions in the shaky voices of men who have seen something they cannot explain: recognition. Bellerophon looked at the ambush and recognized it, not just as a military tactic but as a truth, a revelation, the final piece of a puzzle that he had been assembling without knowing it since the day he arrived in Lycia carrying a letter he had not read.</p>
<p>He recognized that Iobates was trying to kill him.</p>
<p>Not in the abstract, not as a theoretical possibility, not as the vague suspicion that had been growing in the back of his mind since the Chimera. He recognized it as a fact. The Chimera had been a death sentence. The Solymi had been a death sentence. The Amazons had been a death sentence. And this ambush, these thirty men with their bronze blades hidden in the brush, was the final death sentence, the one that dispensed with the pretense of heroic tasks and cut straight to the killing.</p>
<p>Something broke in Bellerophon then. Or perhaps “broke” is the wrong word; perhaps the right word is “opened,” because what happened was not a destruction but a release, the opening of a door that had been locked for a long time, behind which something old and powerful and terrible had been waiting with the patience of the deep sea, the patience of the tides, the patience of the blood that ran in Bellerophon’s veins, the blood that was half mortal and half divine, the blood of Poseidon.</p>
<p>He turned away from the ambush. He turned toward the city. And he began to walk.</p>
<div class="section-break">
✦   ✦   ✦
</div>
<p>The men in the ambush did not attack. They had been ordered to kill Bellerophon, yes, but orders are one thing and the presence of a man walking toward you with that expression on his face is another, and the thirty shadows, who had killed many men in many dark places and were not, as a group, prone to hesitation, hesitated. Some of them stood up from the brush and watched him go. Some of them kept their weapons drawn but did not use them, held in place by something that was not cowardice but was adjacent to it, the instinct that tells a predator when it has misjudged its prey, when the thing it thought was vulnerable is in fact the most dangerous thing in the landscape. A few of them followed, at a distance, because curiosity is sometimes stronger than fear, and what was happening was something that none of them had seen before and would never see again.</p>
<p>Bellerophon walked toward the city. He walked steadily, at an even pace, his stride the stride of a man who is not hurrying because there is no need to hurry, because what is coming behind him will keep pace with him no matter how fast or slow he goes. Pegasus walked beside him, the horse’s head high, the wings half-spread, and the golden bridle caught the late afternoon sun and threw light in patterns that shifted and danced on the road ahead of them like reflections on water.</p>
<p>Like reflections on water. Because behind Bellerophon, the water was coming.</p>
<p>It came from nowhere and everywhere. It came from the dry riverbed that ran beside the road, a bed that had been empty since the last rains, months ago, and was now suddenly, impossibly, filling with water that came from no visible source, water that rose and spread with the purposeful, directed energy of a living thing, water that was not flowing downhill, as water should, but flowing forward, following the road, following the man on the road, as though the water knew where the man was going and intended to go there with him.</p>
<p>It was, the men in the ambush would later testify (those who survived; not all of them did), the most terrifying thing any of them had ever witnessed, and these were men who had witnessed a great deal of terrible things. The water was not a flood in the natural sense; natural floods came from storms, from rivers bursting their banks, from the sudden release of water that had been accumulating somewhere upstream. This water came from the earth itself, as though Poseidon, the god of the sea, the god of the earthquake, the god who shook the earth and moved the oceans with the flick of his trident, had opened a vein in the ground and let the sea pour through it, and the sea, obedient to its master, had come, rising and spreading in a broad, shallow tide that covered the road and the fields on either side and kept rising, kept spreading, following Bellerophon as he walked, the water behind him always deeper than the water ahead of him, so that the world behind him was drowning and the world ahead of him was still dry, and the line between the two worlds was the line of his footsteps, and Bellerophon walked along that line with the calm, measured stride of a man who knows exactly what he is doing and has decided to do it regardless of the consequences.</p>
<p>He called out to the god. Not in prayer. Not in supplication. In recognition. The same way you might call out to a father you have not seen in years, a father whose absence was a fact of your life but whose blood ran in your veins and whose power, dormant for decades, was now awake and answering. Bellerophon did not know the words; he did not know the proper forms of address, the rituals and invocations that priests spent years learning. He simply opened his mouth and said, in the language of blood and need and fury, the language that has no grammar and no syntax and no rules but is understood by the divine the way a mother understands a baby’s cry: “Help me.”</p>
<p>And Poseidon helped.</p>
<p>The water rose. It covered the road behind Bellerophon in a tide that was already knee-deep and climbing. It spread across the fields, the terraced vineyards, the olive groves, covering everything in a layer of dark, salt-smelling water that was warm, warmer than it should have been, warm like blood, warm like the sea in midsummer when the sun has been heating it for months and the surface is almost hot enough to steam. The ambushers retreated to the hills, scrambling upward, their weapons forgotten, their mission abandoned, driven by the primal, ancient fear of drowning that is embedded in every human body, the fear that remembers, at the cellular level, that life came from the sea and the sea, if it chooses, can take life back.</p>
<p>Bellerophon walked on. The city was ahead. The gates were open (gates were always open when the hero was returning; the people expected him, waited for him, gathered to cheer), and through the gates he could see the market square, the palace, the rooftops of the buildings where he had been feted and praised and given wine and meat and the adulation of a people who thought he was their savior. The water followed him through the fields, and the first tendrils of it reached the walls, lapping at the stone with a gentle, persistent pressure that was not yet threatening but promised, in the way that rising water always promises, that it would become threatening very soon.</p>
<p>People came to the walls. They saw the water. They saw Bellerophon. They saw the connection between the two, because it was impossible not to see it, impossible not to understand that the water was following him, answering to him, doing his bidding in the way that storms do the bidding of the gods who control them. And the cheering stopped, and the faces on the walls changed, and the change was the same one that Bellerophon had seen in the eyes of the Solymi and the Amazons: the transition from admiration to fear, the moment when the hero becomes the threat, the moment when the sword in your champion’s hand swings, for the first time, in your direction.</p>
<p>The water reached the base of the walls. It rose. It was ankle-deep in the streets now, the lower streets, the ones near the gates, and the merchants were pulling their goods from the ground-level stalls and the women were calling their children inside and the soldiers on the walls were looking at each other with the expressions of men who have been trained to fight other men and have no training at all for fighting the sea.</p>
<div class="section-break">
✦   ✦   ✦
</div>
<p>The women of Lycia came out to meet him. They came through the gate, not running but walking, their steps deliberate, their faces set, and they came not with weapons but with bare hands and lifted skirts, the ancient gesture of supplication that was also, in its raw exposure, a gesture of shame, a way of saying: look at what you are doing. Look at what you are forcing us to do. Look at the humiliation you are imposing on us, and be ashamed, and stop.</p>
<p>Bellerophon saw them. He saw the women of Lycia, the mothers and wives and daughters and sisters of the men who had cheered for him and the soldiers who had followed him and the king who had tried to kill him, and they were walking toward him through rising water with their skirts lifted above their knees, and their faces were not angry and not afraid but something else, something that took him a moment to identify because he had not seen it directed at him in a long time: disappointed. They were disappointed in him, the way you are disappointed in a child who knows better, who has been taught better, who has the capacity for better but has chosen, in a moment of rage, to do worse.</p>
<p>And something in Bellerophon, something that the altitude had not yet killed, something that the power had not yet consumed, something that was still connected to the ground, to the human, to the part of himself that remembered what it was like to be small and afraid and at the mercy of forces larger than himself, responded.</p>
<p>He stopped.</p>
<p>The water stopped with him. It halted its advance as though it had hit an invisible wall, and the surface, which had been churning and roiling with the energy of its pursuit, went still, flat, reflective, so that the women walking toward Bellerophon could see their own faces in it, and Bellerophon could see his own face in it, and the face he saw was not the face of a hero or a god but the face of a man standing in water he had summoned, surrounded by damage he had caused, holding a power he had not earned and did not deserve and could not, if he was honest with himself, control.</p>
<p>He turned back. He walked away from the city, back the way he had come, and the water receded with him, drawing back from the walls, draining from the streets, retreating across the fields like a tide going out, leaving behind wet earth and scattered debris and the shocked, shaking people of a city that had come within minutes of drowning. The water followed Bellerophon back to the road, back to the place where the ambush had been set, and there it sank into the earth, disappearing as suddenly as it had appeared, leaving nothing but mud and the smell of salt and the silence that follows a catastrophe that almost happened but did not quite.</p>
<p>Bellerophon stood on the wet road and breathed. Pegasus stood beside him, the horse’s flanks heaving, the wings trembling, the great dark eyes wide and rolling, and Bellerophon put his hand on the horse’s neck and felt the pulse, fast and strong, and he said nothing, because there was nothing to say. He had called upon the sea god, his father (if Poseidon was his father, if the stories his mother had told him were true and not the comfortable lies that women tell their sons to make them feel special), and the sea god had answered, and the answer had been more than Bellerophon had asked for, more than he had wanted, more than he could control. He had asked for help and received a flood. He had asked for justice and received destruction. He had asked for power and received the knowledge of what power does to the world it is used on, which is not the same knowledge as the knowledge of what power does to the man who uses it, but is its necessary complement, and the two together, the knowledge of power’s effect on others and the knowledge of power’s effect on oneself, are the twin poles of a wisdom that Bellerophon was not yet wise enough to possess.</p>
<div class="section-break">
✦   ✦   ✦
</div>
<p>Iobates came to him that evening. Not summoned him, not sent for him, not dispatched a servant with a message; the king came himself, walking through the wet streets of his own city, stepping around the puddles and the debris, his royal robes trailing in the mud, his guard left behind at the palace door because this was not a moment for guards, not a moment for ceremony, not a moment for the careful, calculated performances that kings give when they are being kings. This was a moment for truth, and truth, in Iobates’s experience, was best delivered without an audience.</p>
<p>He found Bellerophon in the stables, grooming Pegasus. The hero’s hands were steady, his movements practiced, the comb passing through the white mane in long, even strokes, but his eyes, when he looked up at the king, were the eyes of a man who has seen something in himself that he did not expect to see and has not yet decided what to do with the seeing.</p>
<p>Iobates held out the sealed tablet. He held it in both hands, the way you hold something that is both valuable and dangerous, the way you hold a weapon you are surrendering. The seal was broken, the wax crumbled, the tablet itself worn from handling, from the many times Iobates had taken it out and read it and put it back and taken it out again, weighing its words against the evidence of his own eyes, measuring its accusation against the character of the man it accused.</p>
<p>“Read it,” the king said.</p>
<p>Bellerophon took the tablet. He looked at it for a long moment before reading, turning it over in his hands, feeling the weight of it, the smooth wood, the fragments of wax that clung to the edges. This object. This small, ordinary object. He had carried it from Argos to Lycia, had carried it across the sea, had presented it to Iobates with the trusting formality of a guest delivering a message from one king to another. He had carried his own death sentence in his hands without knowing it, had smiled at the king as he handed it over, had eaten the king’s food and drunk the king’s wine for nine days while the king read and reread the words that said “kill him” and tried to find a way to do it.</p>
<p>He read the words.</p>
<p>The silence that followed was not the silence of shock. Shock implies surprise, and Bellerophon, in the deepest part of himself, the part that the sky had not reached, the part that still lived on the ground and understood ground-level things, was not surprised. He had known, or had almost known, or had known without admitting that he knew, which is a particular kind of knowledge, a knowledge that lives in the body rather than the mind, in the tightening of the gut and the quickening of the pulse and the prickling of the skin that tells you something is wrong before your conscious mind has assembled the evidence into a conclusion. He had known that the tasks were too difficult, too numerous, too conveniently lethal to be anything other than what they were: attempts on his life, wrapped in the language of royal service, disguised as opportunities for glory.</p>
<p>But knowing it and reading it were different things. Knowing it was abstract, theoretical, a suspicion that could be managed and contained and filed away in the part of the mind where uncomfortable possibilities went to be ignored. Reading it was concrete. The words were there, in Proetus’s hand, clear and unambiguous: “Kill the bearer of this letter, for he has dishonored my wife and my house.”</p>
<p>“He lies,” Bellerophon said. His voice was flat, toneless, the voice of a man who is holding something very large and very heavy and very sharp and is being very, very careful with it. “I did not touch his wife. She came to me. I refused her. She lied, and he believed her, or pretended to believe her, and he sent me here to die.”</p>
<p>“Yes,” said Iobates.</p>
<p>The word hung between them, a single syllable carrying the weight of months of deception, months of impossible tasks, months of feasts that were also farewells, of praise that was also preparation for killing, of a hospitality that was also a death sentence. Yes. The king acknowledged it. The king admitted it. And in that admission, the entire elaborate structure of Bellerophon’s time in Lycia, the carefully maintained fiction that he was a valued guest performing heroic deeds for a grateful kingdom, collapsed into its true shape: a man had been manipulated into killing and being killed, and the manipulation had come from both sides, from Proetus who sent the letter and from Iobates who followed its instructions, and Bellerophon, the man in the middle, the man who carried his own death warrant without knowing it, had been the instrument and the target of a conspiracy that had nothing to do with his crimes (he had no crimes) and everything to do with the crimes of others (Stheneboea’s lie, Proetus’s credulity, Iobates’s obedience to a duty he should have questioned).</p>
<p>“Why are you telling me this now?” Bellerophon asked.</p>
<p>Iobates looked at him. The king’s face was old, older than Bellerophon had realized, the face of a man who has been carrying something heavy for a long time and has decided, finally, to set it down, not because the weight has become unbearable but because the carrying has become pointless. The ambush had failed. The flood had come. The gods, clearly, were on Bellerophon’s side, and fighting the gods was something that Iobates had neither the resources nor the inclination to do.</p>
<p>“Because I cannot kill you,” the king said. “Because I have tried, and I have failed, and I have run out of ways to try. And because,” he paused, and something passed across his face that might have been shame, the rusty, unfamiliar expression of a man who has not felt shame in a long time and is rediscovering how much it costs, “because Proetus may have lied. And if he lied, then everything I have done to you, every task, every danger, every ambush, was done in service of a lie, and I would rather know that I served a lie and stopped than know that I served a lie and continued.”</p>
<p>Bellerophon looked at the tablet in his hands. He looked at the words. He looked at the shape of the letters, the particular curves and strokes that Proetus had made with whatever stylus he had used, sitting in whatever room he had sat in, writing the words that would send a man he had purified, a man he had shared salt with, a man who had been his guest, to his death. The letters were small and neat and precise, the letters of a man who was careful, who was deliberate, who did not act in haste or anger but in cold, considered self-interest, and the coldness of those letters, the deliberateness of them, was, in its way, worse than the lie they conveyed, because the lie was Stheneboea’s but the decision to kill was Proetus’s, and decisions made in cold blood are always worse than decisions made in hot blood, because cold blood means you had time to think and thought about it and decided to do it anyway.</p>
<p>He could have been angry. He was, in fact, angry, somewhere deep inside, in the place where the flood had come from, the place where Poseidon’s blood ran hottest. But the anger was covered, layered over, held down by something else, something heavier and sadder and more exhausting than anger: understanding. He understood now. He understood why he had been sent to Lycia. He understood why the tasks had been impossible. He understood why the hospitality had been so elaborate, so generous, so carefully, meticulously maintained, because hospitality was the shell that concealed the killing, the beautiful surface that covered the ugly mechanism, the smile on the face of the man who was sharpening the knife behind his back.</p>
<p>He understood, and the understanding did not bring peace. It brought the opposite of peace: a clarity so fierce and so unwelcome that it felt like being flayed, like having the skin peeled back to reveal the raw, red truth beneath. The truth was this: everything that had happened to him since Argos, everything, the sea crossing, the nine days of feasting, the Chimera, the Solymi, the Amazons, all of it, every battle and every triumph and every moment of glory, had been built on a lie. Stheneboea’s lie. A woman’s wounded vanity, transformed by the machinery of royal politics into a chain of events that had killed hundreds of people and turned Bellerophon from a repentant exile into a weapon of mass destruction, and the weapon had not known it was a weapon, had thought it was a hero, had believed the story it was being told about itself because the story was flattering and the truth was not.</p>
<p>Bellerophon set the tablet down. He set it on the stable shelf, between the curry combs and the leather oil, in the mundane, practical space where such things belonged, because in the end, for all its consequences, it was just a piece of wood with words on it, and words on wood are not fate; they are merely words, and fate is what you choose to do after you have read them.</p>
<p>“What happens now?” he asked.</p>
<p>Iobates looked at him. The king looked old. The king looked tired. The king looked like a man who has been playing a game for months and has finally realized that the game was not worth playing, that the prize was not worth winning, that the cost of participation was higher than the cost of walking away.</p>
<p>“Now,” said Iobates, “I think we should talk about the future.”</p>
<p>And they did.</p>
</div>
<div class="chapter">
<div class="chapter-header">
<span class="chapter-label">— Chapter Twelve —</span>
<section id="the-king-of-lycia" class="level2 chapter-title">
<h2 class="chapter-title">The King of Lycia</h2>
</section>
</div>
<p>The wedding was held in spring, when the almond trees along the Xanthus were in bloom and the hills above the city were carpeted in wildflowers, purple and yellow and white, so that the landscape looked as though it were trying to be beautiful, as though nature itself had decided that this occasion, this union of the stranger-hero and the king’s daughter, required its best efforts. Philonoe came down the steps of the palace in a robe of white linen with gold thread woven through it, and her hair was bound with ribbons the color of the sea, and her face, when she looked at Bellerophon, held an expression that was not quite love (love comes later, or sometimes not at all, in marriages arranged by kings for political purposes) but was something close to it, something that might grow into love if given sufficient time and care and the particular kind of attention that transforms proximity into intimacy.</p>
<p>Bellerophon looked at her and thought: she is beautiful. And she was. Philonoe had her father’s intelligence and her mother’s grace, and she carried herself with the quiet confidence of a woman who has grown up in a palace and knows, without arrogance, that she belongs there. She was not Stheneboea. Bellerophon was grateful for this, more grateful than he could have articulated, because Stheneboea had been fire and urgency and the particular kind of beauty that demands a response, that will not be ignored, that reaches out and grabs you by the throat and says “look at me,” and Philonoe was not that. Philonoe was quieter. Steadier. The kind of beauty that you notice gradually, that reveals itself in layers, that grows more compelling with familiarity rather than less. She was, in a word, sustainable, and Bellerophon, who had been living at an unsustainable pitch for months, needed something sustainable the way a man who has been running needs a chair.</p>
<p>The ceremony was elaborate, as royal ceremonies always are, full of rituals whose original meanings had been forgotten centuries ago but whose forms were maintained with the tenacious conservatism of tradition, which clings to the how long after it has lost the why. There were sacrifices: a bull, white and unblemished, whose blood was caught in a golden bowl and offered to Zeus; a ram for Poseidon (Iobates had insisted on this, a gesture of acknowledgment, perhaps of apology, to the god who had sent the flood); grain and wine and honey for Athena, whose golden bridle had started everything. The priests chanted. The incense burned. The people watched and cheered and threw flowers and felt the particular satisfaction that ordinary people feel when extraordinary people do ordinary things, the satisfaction of seeing the hero tamed, domesticated, brought down from the sky and into the comprehensible rhythms of human life.</p>
<p>Iobates gave the couple half his kingdom. This was not metaphorical; the old king literally divided Lycia along the line of the river Xanthus, keeping the western half with its coastal cities and giving the eastern half, with its inland plains and mountain borders, to Bellerophon. It was generous, or it appeared generous, which in royal politics amounts to the same thing. In practice, it was the eastern half that bordered the territory of the Solymi (what was left of them) and the Amazon lands (what was left of those), which meant that Bellerophon was being given the responsibility of defending the borders he had created, of maintaining the peace he had imposed, of governing the consequences of his own violence. Whether Iobates intended this as a reward or a lesson was unclear, and the old king, when pressed, only smiled the smile of a man who has been a king for thirty years and has learned that the best gifts are the ones that teach something.</p>
<div class="section-break">
✦   ✦   ✦
</div>
<p>The years that followed were, by any measure that the world uses to measure such things, good years. Bellerophon ruled his half of Lycia with a competence that surprised everyone, including himself. He had not been trained for administration (princes of Corinth were trained for combat and rhetoric and the art of looking impressive on horseback, which is a different skill set entirely), but he discovered, in the quiet of his new palace, in the daily rhythms of governance, that the skills of a warrior and the skills of a ruler were not as different as they appeared. Both required the ability to assess a situation quickly. Both required the ability to make decisions under pressure. Both required the willingness to accept responsibility for the outcomes of those decisions. And both, if you were honest about it, required a certain comfort with power, a willingness to exercise authority over others, that Bellerophon possessed in abundance, thanks to the months he had spent exercising the most extreme form of authority imaginable: the authority of life and death, delivered from the sky.</p>
<p>He built roads. He established markets. He settled disputes between villages with a fairness that earned him the grudging respect of people who had initially been wary of this stranger from across the sea, this man who had arrived on a flying horse and killed their neighbors and flooded their capital and married their princess, all within the space of a single season. He was, the people of eastern Lycia discovered, not a bad king. He was attentive. He was just. He listened to complaints with patience and delivered judgments with clarity, and if there was something slightly distant about him, something that kept the people at arm’s length even when he was standing among them, something that suggested a man who was present in body but partly absent in spirit, well, that was to be expected from a man who had done the things he had done. Heroes were not meant to be comfortable. Heroes were not meant to be ordinary. The distance was part of the package, and the people accepted it the way they accepted the weather: as a condition of existence that could be endured but not changed.</p>
<p>Philonoe saw it more clearly, because Philonoe was closer, and proximity reveals what distance conceals. She saw the way Bellerophon’s eyes drifted upward when he thought no one was watching. Not metaphorically upward, toward the ceiling or the sky above the ceiling, in the way that people’s eyes go up when they are thinking or remembering. Literally upward. Toward the sky. Toward the blue, open, limitless space above the palace, above the city, above the world. He looked up the way a prisoner looks at the door, the way a sailor looks at the horizon, the way a man who has been somewhere extraordinary looks at the place he used to go when his life was extraordinary and is now ordinary and the ordinariness is slowly, quietly, day by day, making him insane.</p>
<p>She said nothing about this, because Philonoe was wise in the particular way that women married to difficult men learn to be wise: she understood that some things could not be addressed directly, that some wounds could not be healed by attention, that some absences could not be filled by presence. She gave him what she could: a home, a hearth, a bed, the warmth of her body and the steadiness of her temperament and the uncomplaining competence of a woman who has accepted her role and intends to fill it well, even if (especially if) the man she fills it for is not entirely present to appreciate it.</p>
<p>They had children. Three of them, in quick succession, the way royal families produce children, with the efficient purposefulness of a dynasty being built. Isander came first, a boy with Bellerophon’s dark hair and Philonoe’s serious eyes, a child who was quiet and watchful and seemed, even in infancy, to be paying attention to things that other infants did not notice. Then Hippolochus, louder, brighter, more evidently alive, a boy who laughed easily and ran everywhere and had, by the age of three, the particular gift for chaos that marks a child who will either lead armies or drive his parents mad, possibly both. And finally Laodamia, a girl, small and fierce and so beautiful that the servants whispered about divine blood and the priests nodded and said nothing, because saying nothing is the safest response when the divine is mentioned and you are not sure whether the divinity in question is listening.</p>
<p>Bellerophon loved his children. This should be noted, because the story that is coming, the part that the poets tell with relish and the moralists tell with satisfaction, tends to obscure it. He loved them in the clumsy, overwhelmed way that men of action love the small, fragile things that they have created, the way a swordsmith loves a glass vase, with the constant, terrified awareness that the same hands that shaped the sword could shatter the vase without meaning to, without even trying. He held Isander with exaggerated gentleness, as though the baby were made of something that might break. He chased Hippolochus through the palace gardens with a joy that was unfeigned and uncomplicated and, for those moments, entirely present. He sang to Laodamia (badly; Bellerophon had many gifts, but music was not among them) in the dark hours when the baby cried and Philonoe slept, walking the child back and forth across the room, his bare feet on the cold stone, his voice a rough, tuneless murmur that the baby, blessedly, seemed to find soothing.</p>
<p>He was, in these moments, a man. Just a man. Not a hero, not a killer, not a rider of divine horses, not a weapon of mass destruction or a force of nature or a name that the poets sang. Just a man holding a baby in the dark, trying not to wake his wife, singing a song he did not know the words to. And the ordinariness of it, the beautiful, unbearable ordinariness of it, was both the best thing in his life and the thing that would, ultimately, destroy him, because ordinariness was the one thing that Bellerophon could not sustain, the one condition that the part of him that had lived in the sky could not accept, the one state of being that the man who had flown was incapable of enduring.</p>
<div class="section-break">
✦   ✦   ✦
</div>
<p>He still flew. Pegasus was stabled in the royal compound, in a building that had been constructed specifically for the horse, with high ceilings and wide doors and an open courtyard large enough for takeoff and landing. Bellerophon rode the horse regularly, several times a week at first, then daily, then (as the years passed and the ordinariness accumulated and the sky called louder) several times a day, departing after the morning audiences and returning only when the evening torches were lit, spending the hours between in the air, above the world, in the clean, cold space where the questions of governance and family and ordinary life could not reach him.</p>
<p>He climbed higher each time. This was the pattern that Philonoe noticed first, because she watched his departures and arrivals with the careful attention of a woman monitoring a wound that is not healing, and she noticed that the horse was returning with frost on its wings. Not the light frost of a cold morning, the kind that melts in minutes when the sun hits it, but the deep, crystalline frost of extreme altitude, the kind that forms when you fly so high that the water in the air freezes on contact with a surface. Bellerophon’s lips were blue when he landed. His fingers were numb. His breathing was ragged, the breathing of a man who has been breathing thin air for hours and whose body is protesting the deprivation even as his mind craves it.</p>
<p>“How high did you go today?” Philonoe asked once, early on, when the frost was still light and the question was still possible.</p>
<p>“Not high enough,” Bellerophon said, and the way he said it, the quality of longing in his voice, the distant, unfocused look in his eyes, told Philonoe everything she needed to know about the direction in which her husband was traveling, even if she did not yet understand the destination.</p>
<p>She did not ask again. Asking was pointless; the answer would always be the same, and the sameness of the answer was the measure of the problem. Not high enough. Never high enough. No altitude, no height, no distance from the ground would ever be enough, because what Bellerophon was looking for was not a place in the sky but an escape from himself, from the ordinariness of himself, from the unbearable fact that a man who has killed a monster and broken nations and called the sea to do his bidding is still, at the end of the day, just a man, a creature of flesh and blood and need, who gets tired and gets hungry and gets old and will, eventually, die, and the dying is the part that he cannot accept, the fact that heroes are mortal, that glory fades, that the songs the poets sing will outlast the man they sing about, and the man, in the cold mathematics of eternity, is the least important part of his own story.</p>
<p>This is the failure that the old stories call hubris, but hubris is too simple a word for what was happening to Bellerophon. Hubris implies arrogance, implies a swollen head, implies a man who thinks too much of himself, and Bellerophon did not think too much of himself; he thought too little. He thought so little of the ordinary, human, ground-level version of himself that he could not bear to be that version, could not bear to sit in the palace and hear petitions and settle disputes and be a husband and a father and a king, because all of these things were things that any man could do, and Bellerophon knew, with a certainty that was rooted not in arrogance but in experience, that he was not any man. He had ridden Pegasus. He had touched the sky. He had felt the air at the edge of the world, the thin, cold, impossibly pure air that no mortal was meant to breathe, and having breathed it, he could not go back to breathing the thick, warm, ordinary air of the ground.</p>
<p>The sky had ruined him for the earth. That was the truth of it. The transcendent experience had not enriched his ordinary life but had poisoned it, had made every ground-level moment feel like a diminishment, a reduction, a fall from a height he had not yet fallen from but was always, in his mind, falling from, so that the fall, when it finally came, would not be a surprise but a confirmation of something he had been feeling for years: that the ground was where he did not belong, that the sky was where he did, and that the gap between the two was the gap between what he was and what he deserved to be.</p>
<div class="section-break">
✦   ✦   ✦
</div>
<p>There was an evening, several years into his reign, when Bellerophon sat in the great hall of his palace and listened to a poet sing about the slaying of the Chimera, and the experience was so strange, so dislocating, that it felt like being in two places at once: the place where the song was being sung and the place where the song had happened, and the distance between them was not time but something else, something more fundamental, the distance between the man who had done the thing and the story that was being told about the thing, which were not the same, had never been the same, could never be the same, because stories simplify and life complicates, and the simplification is the price of immortality.</p>
<p>The poet sang of Bellerophon’s courage, his skill, his divine favor. The poet sang of the spear thrust into the Chimera’s mouth, of the lead melting in the fire, of the monster’s death. The poet did not sing of the fear, the burned arm, the broken spear, the moment when the serpent’s fangs snapped shut an inch from Bellerophon’s thigh and death missed him by a margin so small that you could not have fit a blade between them. The poet did not sing of the goat’s eyes, the innocent eyes, the eyes that had been afraid. The poet did not sing of the nights afterward, the sleepless hours when the smell of burning flesh came back and would not leave, the dreams in which the Chimera was alive and burning and the fire was not the creature’s fire but Bellerophon’s own, coming from inside him, consuming him from within.</p>
<p>The poet sang a hero. Bellerophon heard a stranger.</p>
<p>He excused himself from the feast early that evening, citing a headache that was not entirely invented (the disconnection between his experience and its narration had produced a sensation that was, in fact, very like a headache, the pain of two realities pressing against each other inside a single skull), and he went to the stables and stood with Pegasus in the dark and looked at the sky through the open doors and felt the pull.</p>
<p>It was stronger now. It had been growing stronger for years, like a tide that rises a little higher each day, each month, each season, until the beach that used to be wide and safe is narrow and threatened and eventually gone, swallowed by the water that has been coming for it all along. The pull was not a thought; it was a sensation, a physical feeling, a tightening in his chest, a lifting in his limbs, as though his body were trying to rise, trying to leave the ground of its own accord, and only the weight of flesh and bone and obligation kept it tethered.</p>
<p>Olympus. The word formed in his mind with the clarity of a bell being struck. Olympus. The home of the gods. The mountain that touched the sky. The place where the immortals lived, above the clouds, above the weather, above the grinding, relentless machinery of human time. The place where death could not reach, where songs were not needed because the deeds themselves endured, where the gap between what you were and what you deserved to be did not exist because you were, simply and entirely, what you deserved to be.</p>
<p>He deserved Olympus. The thought was not new, but it had been, until now, a whisper, a suggestion, a fantasy that he entertained in the way that men entertain fantasies, with half-belief and full desire, knowing that the thing they want is impossible and wanting it anyway. Now the whisper was becoming a voice, and the voice was becoming a shout, and the shout was becoming a certainty that filled him like water fills a vessel, rising from the bottom, covering everything, making everything else (the palace, the kingdom, the wife, the children, the ordinary, beautiful, unbearable life he had built) seem like details, like footnotes, like the background noise of an existence that was merely preliminary, merely preparatory, merely the preamble to the real existence that awaited him in the sky.</p>
<p>He had killed the Chimera. He had broken the Solymi. He had defeated the Amazons. He had called the sea to do his bidding. He had survived everything the world had thrown at him, every trap, every test, every attempt on his life. He had done things that no mortal had ever done, things that the gods themselves might have hesitated to attempt, and he had done them not with divine power (Pegasus was divine, yes, and the bridle was divine, but the hand that held the bridle and the will that guided the horse were his, mortal, human, earned through suffering and exile and the long, hard work of becoming who he was), and if that was not enough to earn a place among the gods, then what was? What more did you have to do? What more did you have to be?</p>
<p>The answer, which Bellerophon could not hear because it was spoken in a register too quiet for a man in the full roar of his own ambition, was this: you had to be mortal. That was all. You had to be mortal, and accept it, and find in the acceptance not a defeat but a different kind of victory, the victory of a man who touches the sky and comes back down and is grateful for both the touching and the coming down, who carries the memory of the heights into the depths and lets it illuminate rather than diminish the ground-level world. You had to integrate the transcendent experience into the ordinary life, not replace the ordinary life with the transcendent experience. You had to be both the rider and the man, the hero and the father, the king and the husband, and the both-ness, the integration, the holding of opposites without being torn apart by them, was the real achievement, the real heroism, the real ascent.</p>
<p>But Bellerophon could not hear this. The sky was too loud. The pull was too strong. The voice of his own ambition, which he mistook for the voice of his destiny, was shouting too forcefully for any quieter truth to penetrate.</p>
<div class="section-break">
✦   ✦   ✦
</div>
<p>Philonoe found him in the stables. She stood in the doorway and watched him for a moment, her husband, the father of her children, the king of her kingdom, standing in the dark with his hand on the horse’s neck and his face turned upward, and she knew. She did not know the specifics (Olympus, the flight, the certainty that he deserved divinity), but she knew the essential thing, the thing that mattered, which was that she was losing him. Not to another woman, not to war, not to any of the comprehensible dangers that wives prepare themselves for when they marry men of ambition and violence. She was losing him to the sky. She was losing him to the thing he had been before he was hers, the thing he had become during the months of impossible tasks and divine favor, the thing that lived in him like a second self, a self that was bigger and brighter and more demanding than the self that sat at the family table and held the children and lay beside her in the dark.</p>
<p>She could have spoken. She could have said the things that wives say when they feel their husbands slipping away: come back, stay, I need you, the children need you, the world needs you here, on the ground, in the real, where things are hard and complicated and unglamorous but where love lives, because love cannot live in the sky, love needs weight and gravity and the friction of two bodies and two minds pressing against each other, and the sky has none of these things, the sky is clean and cold and empty, and empty is not the same as free, no matter how much it looks like freedom from below.</p>
<p>She could have said these things, but she did not, because she knew (the particular wisdom of women married to men who are leaving, the wisdom that comes from the recognition that some departures cannot be prevented, only witnessed) that saying them would change nothing. The pull was too strong. The sky was too loud. The man in the stable, the man with his face turned upward and his hand on the divine horse’s neck, was already gone. His body was here, in the stable, in the palace, in the kingdom, in the marriage, but the essential part of him, the part that mattered, the part that made him Bellerophon, was already in the sky, had been in the sky for years, and what remained on the ground was a shell, a placeholder, a man-shaped absence that went through the motions of ruling and fathering and husbanding without the animating spark that made those motions meaningful.</p>
<p>She turned away from the doorway and walked back to the palace and put the children to bed and lay down in the empty bed and stared at the ceiling and did not cry, because crying was for women who still hoped, and Philonoe, who was wise in the particular way that comes from loving someone you cannot keep, had moved past hope into something that was not quite acceptance and not quite resignation but existed somewhere in between, in the territory of women who know that the storm is coming and who have decided to stand and face it rather than run, because running is undignified and facing it, at least, allows you to see it clearly, to know its shape and size and the exact moment of its arrival, which is a cold comfort but a comfort nonetheless.</p>
<p>In the stable, Bellerophon stood with Pegasus and looked at the sky and thought: soon.</p>
<p>The word was a promise. A destination. A prayer that was not directed at any god but at the sky itself, at the limitless, open, beckoning space above the world where he had been happy (or something close to happy, or something that felt like happiness when you were moving fast enough and high enough for the details to blur), and the sky received his prayer the way the sky receives all prayers, which is to say with perfect silence, perfect indifference, perfect and infinite openness, which is not the same thing as welcome but which looks, from below, exactly like it.</p>
<p>Soon. He would fly to Olympus. He would take his place among the gods. He would leave behind the ground and the palace and the kingdom and the wife and the children and the ordinary, beautiful, unbearable life, and he would ascend, and the ascent would be the final act of the story, the climax, the apotheosis, the moment when the man became more than a man and the hero became more than a hero and the rider of Pegasus became what the rider of Pegasus was always meant to become: immortal.</p>
<p>This is what he believed. This is what he told himself. And the telling was so convincing, so complete, so perfectly aligned with every story he had ever heard about heroes and gods and the rewards of greatness, that he did not notice the other story, the one that was happening beneath the one he was telling himself, the one in which a man who has lost contact with the ground is not ascending but simply falling upward, and the difference between the two, which is invisible from below, is the difference between flight and falling, which is not direction but control, and control is the thing that Bellerophon was losing, had been losing since the Chimera, had been losing with every flight, every altitude, every moment spent above the world where the faces could not reach him, and the loss was so gradual and so pleasant that it felt not like loss but like liberation, which is the cruelest trick that loss can play.</p>
</div>
<div class="chapter">
<div class="chapter-header">
<span class="chapter-label">— Chapter Thirteen —</span>
<section id="the-flight" class="level2 chapter-title">
<h2 class="chapter-title">The Flight</h2>
</section>
</div>
<p>He left at dawn. This was deliberate; he could have left at any time, could have mounted Pegasus in the middle of the night and risen into the darkness without a witness, without a farewell, without the inconvenience of being seen, but something in Bellerophon, some remnant of the man he had been before the sky consumed him, insisted on the light. If he was going to do this, if he was going to leave the ground forever, he would do it in the open, in the honest, unforgiving clarity of morning, where the world could see him go and he could see the world he was leaving, because the leaving, if it was to mean what he needed it to mean, had to be conscious, had to be chosen, had to be an act of will rather than a slip, a falling-away, a gradual dissolution into the air.</p>
<p>Philonoe was awake. She was standing in the doorway of their chambers when he passed, dressed for riding, the golden bridle in his hand, and she looked at him with the expression she had been preparing for months, the expression that she had assembled, piece by piece, from the materials available to a woman who has decided to be brave: calm, steady, unyielding, with a fissure running through it that she hoped he would not see, a crack in the composure through which something raw and private leaked, the way water leaks through a crack in a jar, not dramatically, not catastrophically, but steadily, persistently, in a way that will eventually empty the jar.</p>
<p>“You are going,” she said. Not a question. She had stopped asking questions about his flights a long time ago, because the answers were always the same and the sameness was a kind of wall that questions could not penetrate.</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>“Higher than before.”</p>
<p>“Yes.”</p>
<p>She looked at him. He looked at the bridle in his hand, at the golden metal that caught the early light and threw it back in warm reflections, at the intricate workmanship that was beyond any mortal smith’s capacity, at the gift of a goddess who had given it to him in a dream and had not, since then, appeared again, which might have meant that she was satisfied with how he had used it or might have meant that she had turned away, that she was no longer watching, that the gift had been given and the rest was up to him and the rest, as it turned out, was this: a man standing in a doorway with a golden bridle, about to fly to Olympus, about to claim divinity, about to do the one thing that no mortal had ever done, and a woman standing opposite him, trying to keep the crack in her composure from widening into a break.</p>
<p>“Will you come back?” she asked.</p>
<p>Bellerophon opened his mouth to answer, and the word that came out was “yes,” but it was a thin word, a hollow word, a word that had the shape of reassurance but not the substance, and they both heard its hollowness, and the hearing was a kind of farewell, more final than any embrace, because it meant that the man who was leaving no longer had the capacity to mean the things he said, that the gap between his words and his intentions had widened to the point where they were no longer connected, and the disconnection was the last symptom of the disease that had been consuming him, the disease that had no name in any language he spoke but that the Greeks would later call hubris, and the followers of deeper wisdoms would later call inflation, and that was, in truth, simpler than either of those words: it was the inability to accept that he was human, which is the simplest and the hardest thing that any human being has to do.</p>
<p>He walked past her. He walked through the palace, through the corridors that he had paced at night with Laodamia in his arms, past the hall where he had heard the poet sing about the Chimera, past the kitchens where the servants were preparing the morning meal and looked up at him with the unsurprised deference of people who have learned to treat the extraordinary as routine. He walked through the courtyard where Hippolochus would play when he woke, where Isander would sit with his tutor and learn the things that princes learn, and he did not look at the places where his children would be, because looking would have required feeling, and feeling would have required staying, and staying was the one thing he could not do.</p>
<p>The stable. Pegasus. The horse was awake, standing in the center of the courtyard with his wings half-spread, catching the first warmth of the sun, and when Bellerophon approached, the horse turned his great head and looked at him with those dark, fathomless eyes that had seen the blood of Medusa and the springs of Pirene and the fire of the Chimera and the mountains of the Solymi and the cities of the Amazons and the sky, the sky, the sky, always the sky, and would see, today, the boundary of the sky, the edge where the mortal world ended and the divine world began.</p>
<p>Bellerophon fitted the bridle. His hands were steady. His heart was not, but his hands were, and hands are what matter when you are fitting a bridle, just as feet are what matter when you are walking toward a precipice, and the steadiness of the hands and the feet can carry you forward even when every other part of you is screaming to stop, to turn back, to go home, to hold the baby, to stay on the ground where the air is thick and warm and human.</p>
<p>He mounted. Pegasus gathered himself, the muscles of the haunches bunching, the wings spreading to their full extent (and the full extent was enormous, wider than the courtyard, so that the tips of the feathers brushed the walls on either side and the shadow they cast covered the ground like a second darkness), and then the horse leaped, and the ground fell away, and Bellerophon rose into the morning sky above Lycia, above his kingdom, above his family, above the life he was leaving, and did not look down.</p>
<div class="section-break">
✦   ✦   ✦
</div>
<p>The first thousand feet were familiar. Bellerophon had climbed this high many times, had spent hours at this altitude, circling above the palace and the city and the patchwork of farms and roads that constituted his kingdom, and the view from a thousand feet was the view he knew best after the view from the ground: the world as a map, as an abstraction, as a beautiful, comprehensible pattern of shapes and colors that bore the same relationship to the real, messy, complicated world that a painting bears to the landscape it depicts. From a thousand feet, you could see the whole of eastern Lycia spread out beneath you, from the Xanthus in the west to the mountains in the north to the scrublands in the east, and it was beautiful, and Bellerophon had loved it (in his way, in the detached, proprietary way that a man loves a thing he owns and has shaped and can see from a position of superiority), and it was not enough.</p>
<p>Two thousand feet. The air was cooler here, not cold but crisp, with a clarity that the lower air lacked, a transparency that made the sky seem closer and the ground seem farther, and the quality of the light changed, became sharper, more defined, as though the air were a lens and climbing through it was adjusting the focus. The palace was a square of white stone on a brown landscape. The city was a cluster of buildings around it. The people, if there were people visible, were not visible from here; they had merged with the ground, become part of it, indistinguishable from the terrain they inhabited.</p>
<p>Five thousand feet. The cold was real now, a physical presence, pressing against Bellerophon’s skin through his clothing, finding the gaps between leather and linen, the exposed skin of his hands and face. His breath came out in clouds. Pegasus’s breath came out in larger clouds, the horse’s exhalations visible for the first time, white and ephemeral against the deepening blue of the sky. The wind was stronger here, not the gentle breezes of the lower altitudes but a sustained, steady flow that pushed against them from the west, and Pegasus adjusted, angling into the wind, using its force the way a sailor uses the sea, not fighting it but incorporating it, turning resistance into lift.</p>
<p>The ground below was losing its detail. The fields were no longer fields but patches of color. The rivers were no longer rivers but lines. The mountains were no longer mountains but shapes, the way mountains look on a map, two-dimensional, symbolic, stripped of the weight and mass and geological presence that makes a mountain a mountain when you are standing at its base looking up. The world was becoming an idea of itself, a concept, a representation, and the transformation was exhilarating in the way that all simplifications are exhilarating, because simplification removes the complications that make things difficult, and difficulty is what Bellerophon was trying to leave behind.</p>
<p>Ten thousand feet. The air was thin. Bellerophon could feel it in his lungs, the way each breath brought less than it should, the way his body had to work harder to extract what it needed from the diminished air, and the working harder produced a lightheadedness that was not unpleasant, that was, in fact, euphoric, a giddiness that seemed to confirm what he already believed: that the higher he went, the better he felt, that altitude was not distance but improvement, not separation but purification, the shedding of everything heavy and earthbound and mortal in preparation for the lightness, the freedom, the immortality that awaited him at the top.</p>
<p>Pegasus was breathing hard. The horse’s wings beat in a rhythm that was faster than the easy, sweeping tempo of lower altitudes, a rapid, effortful cadence that spoke of the difficulty of flying in thin air, of the reduced lift that each wingbeat produced, of the horse’s body straining against the thinning atmosphere in the same way that Bellerophon’s lungs were straining against it. But the horse flew on, because the bridle directed it and the rider willed it and the will of the rider, at this point, was a force that the horse could not resist, not because the bridle was a whip or a goad (it was neither; it was a connection, a bridge between wills) but because the rider’s will was so intense, so focused, so single-minded in its determination to go up, always up, that the horse, connected to that will through the golden metal, had no choice but to comply.</p>
<p>Fifteen thousand feet. The sky was changing color. The blue was deepening, darkening, moving from the bright, cheerful blue of a summer day to a deeper, more serious blue, the blue of depth, the blue of the sea at midday when the sun is directly overhead and the light goes straight down into the water and the water swallows it and gives back this color, this almost-purple, this blue that is so blue it is nearly black. Stars were appearing, faint and tentative at first, like guests arriving early to a party, unsure of their welcome, then brighter, more confident, taking their places in the darkening sky with the authority of things that have been there all along and are merely, now, becoming visible.</p>
<p>Stars in daylight. Bellerophon had never seen this. Had not known it was possible. The stars were always there, of course; every child knew that the stars did not disappear during the day but were simply overwhelmed by the sun’s light, hidden behind the bright screen of the atmosphere, waiting for darkness to reveal them. But here, above the atmosphere, above the bright screen, the waiting was over, and the stars stood naked against the darkening blue, and they were more than he had imagined, more numerous, more various, more alive with a light that was not warm like sunlight but cold, distant, ancient, the light of fires that had been burning since before the earth existed and would burn long after the earth was gone.</p>
<p>The beauty of it took his breath away, which was a problem, because his breath was already in short supply, and the taking away of it left him gasping, vision swimming, the edges of the world (such as they were, at this altitude, where the world had become a curved horizon far below, a blue-green arc that looked fragile and improbable, hanging in the dark of space like a jewel on a cord) going soft and blurry.</p>
<p>But he did not stop. He could not stop. The certainty was too strong, the pull too powerful, the conviction too complete. He was close. He could feel it, not as a physical proximity (how do you feel the proximity of heaven? what nerves detect the approach of the divine?) but as a change in the quality of the air, a charge, an electricity, a vibration that was not sound but was felt the way sound is felt, in the bones, in the teeth, in the spaces between the thoughts, and the vibration said: here. Here is where the mortal world ends. Here is where the divine world begins. Here is the boundary. Here is the door. Here is the threshold that no mortal has ever crossed, not because it is locked but because no mortal has ever come this far, has ever been brave enough or mad enough or desperate enough to ride a divine horse to the edge of heaven and demand admittance.</p>
<p>Bellerophon was brave enough. Bellerophon was mad enough. Bellerophon was desperate enough. And the desperation, which he mistook for ambition, which he mistook for destiny, which he mistook for the fulfillment of everything he had been and done and suffered, was the engine that drove him upward, past the point where the air was sufficient, past the point where the cold was survivable, past the point where the horse could fly without strain, into the thin, dark, star-filled space at the top of the world, where the gods lived, where the immortals feasted, where Bellerophon belonged.</p>
<p>He deserved this. He DESERVED this. The word rang in his mind like a bell, like a trumpet, like the war cry of a man charging into battle, and the battle was against the only enemy he had left, the only enemy he had not yet defeated: the boundary between mortal and divine, the line that separated what he was from what he should have been, the insufferable, intolerable limitation of being human in a world where the gods existed and the sky was open and the horse could fly and the man on the horse had done everything, everything, EVERYTHING that could be asked of any mortal, and still the line was there, still the boundary held, still the door remained closed, and Bellerophon was going to open it, was going to break through it, was going to tear it down with his bare hands if necessary, because he deserved to be on the other side, and the deserving was all the justification he needed, and justification is the last refuge of a man who has stopped asking whether what he wants is the same thing as what he should have.</p>
<div class="section-break">
✦   ✦   ✦
</div>
<p>Zeus sent a gadfly.</p>
<p>Not a thunderbolt. Not a storm. Not a monster or an army or a divine champion armed with celestial weapons and the authority of heaven. A gadfly. A tiny, buzzing, insignificant insect, the kind of creature that bothers cattle in the summer and is brushed away without thought, the kind of creature that exists at the very bottom of the hierarchy of living things, so far below the gods and the heroes and the kings and the warriors that its existence is barely acknowledged, a footnote to creation, an afterthought of the divine plan.</p>
<p>Zeus, the king of the gods, the lord of thunder, the ruler of heaven and earth and the spaces between, the being whose will shaped the cosmos and whose displeasure unmade it, looked down from Olympus at the mortal who was climbing toward him on a winged horse and chose, from all the weapons in his infinite arsenal, the smallest, most trivial, most humiliating one. And the choice was not casual. The choice was precise, deliberate, loaded with a meaning that Bellerophon would have understood if he had been capable, at that moment, of understanding anything other than his own ambition: you are not worth a thunderbolt. You are not important enough for divine wrath. You are a mortal, and mortals are dealt with by mortals’ pests, and the pest that will bring you down is the same pest that bothers the cattle in the fields that you have risen above, the fields where you belong, the fields that you were always going to return to, whether you returned as a king or as a cripple or as a corpse.</p>
<p>The gadfly was small. It was, in fact, so small that Bellerophon did not see it. He was looking up, always up, his eyes fixed on the darkness above where the stars burned and the air shimmered with the proximity of the divine, and the gadfly came from below, from the direction of the earth, from the world of cattle and farms and ordinary things, and it landed on Pegasus’s flank, in the soft, sensitive space behind the right wing where the skin was thin and the nerve endings were close to the surface, and it stung.</p>
<p>It was a small sting. The kind of sting that a horse on the ground would acknowledge with a twitch of the skin, a flick of the tail, a brief, irritated shake and then a return to whatever the horse was doing. But Pegasus was not on the ground. Pegasus was at the edge of the breathable atmosphere, in air so thin that each wingbeat was an act of desperation, in cold so severe that the horse’s muscles were already on the edge of cramping, in a state of physical and psychological strain so extreme that the smallest additional stimulus, the tiniest disruption to the delicate balance of effort and endurance that was keeping them airborne, would be enough to break it.</p>
<p>The gadfly stung. Pegasus flinched. The flinch disrupted the rhythm of the wings. The right wing faltered, dropping a fraction of a second behind the left, and in that fraction of a second, the delicate balance broke, and the horse lurched, and the lurch became a buck, a violent, convulsive spasm of the hindquarters that was not aggression but panic, the instinctive, uncontrollable panic of an animal in pain at an altitude where pain means death, and the buck threw Bellerophon out of the saddle.</p>
<p>He did not fall immediately. There was a moment, a fraction of a moment, a splinter of time so small that it should not have been perceptible but was, hideously and exquisitely was, when Bellerophon was in the air between the horse and the nothing, when his hands had lost the bridle and his legs had lost the horse’s flanks but his body had not yet begun to fall, when he was suspended, weightless, motionless, at the highest point that any mortal had ever reached, at the very edge of the divine realm, at the threshold of the door he had been trying to open, and in that moment, that sliver of eternity, he saw.</p>
<p>He saw Olympus. Or he saw something: a brightness, a radiance, a quality of light that was not sunlight or starlight but something else, a light that seemed to emanate from everywhere and nowhere, a light that was warm and cold at the same time, welcoming and forbidding at the same time, beautiful and terrible at the same time, the light of a place that existed beyond the categories of human experience and could therefore be described only in contradictions, in the language of paradox, which is the language of the divine. He saw it, and it was everything he had imagined, everything he had wanted, everything he had believed he deserved, and it was right there, right there, close enough to touch if he could only reach, if he could only extend his hand, if he could only stretch the last few inches that separated his mortal fingertips from the threshold of heaven.</p>
<p>He reached. His hand went out, grasping at the brightness, at the warmth, at the light that was everything. His fingers extended, straining toward it with every fiber of his being, every ounce of will, every molecule of the ambition that had driven him here, to this height, to this impossibility, to this final, desperate, beautiful, doomed attempt to become what he was not.</p>
<p>His fingers closed on nothing. On air. On the cold, thin, empty air at the top of the world, which was just air, which was always just air, and the hand that grasped it was just a hand, mortal, human, finite, a hand that had held a golden bridle and a lead-tipped spear and a baby in the dark and a wife’s face in the warmth of a bed and all the ordinary, extraordinary things that human hands hold during the course of a human life, and none of them, not even the bridle, not even the divine gift, were enough to hold him here, at the edge, where the air ran out and the gods began.</p>
<p>And then he fell.</p>
<div class="section-break">
✦   ✦   ✦
</div>
<p>The fall was long. This was the cruelest part, or perhaps the second-cruelest part (the cruelest would come later, at the bottom), the fact that it was not a quick descent, not a plummeting, not the rapid, merciful rush of a stone dropped from a height, but a slow, spiraling, protracted falling, the kind of fall that gives you time to think, to feel, to understand fully and completely what is happening to you, which is the one thing that the faller does not want, which is the one thing that the fall insists on providing.</p>
<p>The sky above him was dark, star-filled, beautiful. The sky around him was blue, deepening as he fell through the altitudes, shifting from near-black to indigo to cobalt to the bright, cheerful blue of a summer day, the blue that he had always known, the blue that he had spent his childhood looking up at and his adulthood looking down from. The transition was like watching a life in reverse, the stages of his ascent replaying backward, and with each stage, each shift in the color of the sky, a memory surfaced, sharp and vivid and unbearable.</p>
<p>At the edge of the dark, he remembered Olympus. The brightness. The reach. The hand closing on nothing.</p>
<p>In the deep blue, he remembered the stars appearing in daylight, the beauty that had taken his breath away, the euphoria of the thin air.</p>
<p>In the cobalt, he remembered Philonoe in the doorway, her face assembled from bravery and cracks, asking the question she already knew the answer to.</p>
<p>In the lighter blue, he remembered the children. Isander’s quiet eyes. Hippolochus’s laughter. Laodamia’s weight in his arms, the warmth of her, the smallness of her, the terrifying, wonderful fragility of a new life held in hands that were made for killing.</p>
<p>In the bright blue, the summer blue, he remembered the ground. The feel of it under his feet. The weight of it. The solidity. The way the earth pushed back against you when you walked on it, the way it said, with every step: you are here, you are real, you are heavy, you are mortal, and the heaviness and the mortality are not punishments but conditions, the conditions of being alive, the conditions of being human, the conditions that you traded for the sky, and the trade was the worst trade ever made, and you knew it was the worst trade even as you made it, and you made it anyway, because the sky was louder than the ground, and loudness is not the same as truth, but it is, in the moment of choosing, more persuasive.</p>
<p>He fell. The wind of his falling screamed in his ears, a sound that was like wings, like the beating of enormous wings, but was not wings, was just air, just the ordinary air rushing past an ordinary body as it fell in the ordinary way that bodies fall when they are no longer being held up by anything, and the ordinariness of it, the sheer, relentless, unstoppable ordinariness of a body falling through air under the influence of gravity, was the final lesson, the last thing the sky had to teach him: you were always going to come down. The question was never whether you would fall but how, and the how, the manner of the falling, the quality of the descent, was the only thing you had any control over, and you had chosen to control nothing, had chosen to reach instead of return, had chosen the impossible over the actual, and the impossible, as it turns out, is called impossible for a reason.</p>
<p>Above him, growing smaller with each heartbeat, Pegasus flew on. The horse had recovered from the sting, had regained the rhythm of his wings, had steadied in the thin air and was climbing again, climbing toward the brightness that Bellerophon had reached for and missed, and the horse was not reaching; the horse was simply flying, doing the thing that divine horses do, the thing that divine horses are made for, and the difference between the horse and the rider was this: the horse belonged in the sky because the horse was divine, and the rider did not belong in the sky because the rider was not divine, and the golden bridle that had connected them, that had made the horse’s divinity available to the rider’s mortality, was hanging from Pegasus’s neck, empty, swinging in the wind of the horse’s ascent, and the emptiness of it was the final symbol, the last image, the thing that Bellerophon saw as the horse became a white dot against the dark sky and then became a star and then became nothing: the empty bridle. The empty connection. The severed link between the mortal and the divine.</p>
<p>The ground came up. The ground always comes up. That is the thing about the ground: you can leave it, you can rise above it, you can climb to the very edge of heaven and look down on it with the contempt of a man who has transcended it, but it is always there, waiting, patient, as patient as the sky is patient but with a different kind of patience, the patience of the thing that knows you will return because you have no choice, because gravity is not a suggestion but a law, and laws, unlike the promises of the divine, are not negotiable.</p>
<p>Bellerophon hit the ground on a hillside covered in thorns and dry brush, somewhere on the Aleian Plain, the Plain of Wandering, a desolate stretch of scrubland in the heart of Anatolia that was, as far as anyone knew, the least significant piece of terrain in the civilized world, a place that no poet had ever sung about and no king had ever coveted, a place that existed only to be crossed on the way to somewhere else, and it was here, in this place that mattered to no one, that the greatest hero of his generation, the slayer of the Chimera, the tamer of Pegasus, the man who had almost touched Olympus, came down.</p>
<p>The impact was terrible. The human body is not designed for falling from great heights; it is designed for walking, for running, for the modest, ground-level locomotion that the species evolved for over millions of years of cautious, earthbound existence, and when a body designed for walking encounters the ground at the speed of a body falling from thousands of feet, the encounter is catastrophic. Bones broke. Many bones. The legs, which took the first impact, shattered in ways that the healers who would later examine him (much later, because it would be a long time before anyone found him) would describe with the grim precision of professionals: compound fractures of both femurs, shattered tibias, a pelvis cracked in three places. The spine compressed and shifted, vertebrae grinding against each other, and something in the lower back, some critical junction of nerve and bone, gave way, and the giving way was permanent, and the permanence was the cruelty, because it meant that the man who had ridden Pegasus, the man who had lived in the sky, would never again stand straight, would never again walk without pain, would never again look up at the sky from a height greater than his own broken, diminished, earthbound body could achieve.</p>
<p>He did not die. Zeus, in his precision, in his divine calculation, had calibrated the fall to produce exactly this outcome: not death but survival, not the clean ending of a life but the long, slow diminishment of a life that has been stripped of everything that made it bearable, everything that made it meaningful, everything that made it worth the living. Death would have been a release, an escape, a final flight into whatever comes after, and Zeus did not grant Bellerophon the mercy of release. Zeus granted Bellerophon the mercy of continued existence, which is the cruelest mercy of all, because continued existence, when you have lost everything that made existence bearable, is not mercy but punishment, and the punishment is not for the crime of hubris (hubris is a word that mortals use to describe what the gods punish, but the gods do not punish hubris; the gods punish forgetting, the forgetting of what you are, and what Bellerophon forgot was not his place in the cosmic hierarchy but his own humanity, which is a different thing, a sadder thing, a thing that did not require divine punishment because it was, in itself, its own punishment) but for the simple, unforgivable act of reaching for something that was not his to reach for, which is to say, immortality, which is to say, escape from the human condition, which is to say, the thing that every human being wants and no human being can have, and the wanting of it is not a sin but a tragedy, and the tragedy is not in the wanting but in the almost-having, the moment when the fingers reach and the brightness is right there, right there, and the hand closes on nothing, on air, on the cold emptiness of a dream that was always, always, always going to end this way.</p>
<p>He lay on the hillside. The thorns pressed into his skin. The sun was high. The sky above him was blue, the bright, summer blue, the blue that looks so friendly and so welcoming from below and is, from above, the last thing you see before the dark, the thin, the cold, the edge of heaven, the nothing.</p>
<p>Somewhere above, beyond sight, beyond reach, beyond everything, Pegasus flew on. The horse reached Olympus. The horse crossed the threshold. The horse entered the divine realm and was received by the gods and was given a place among them, a stall in the stables of heaven, a role carrying the thunderbolts of Zeus across the sky. The horse became immortal. The horse became a constellation.</p>
<p>The rider became dust.</p>
</div>
<div class="chapter">
<div class="chapter-header">
<span class="chapter-label">— Chapter Fourteen —</span>
<section id="the-aleian-plain" class="level2 chapter-title">
<h2 class="chapter-title">The Aleian Plain</h2>
</section>
</div>
<p>Homer, who knew the words for everything, who had a phrase for every shade of sea and every quality of light and every texture of human suffering, described it in six words: “consuming his own soul, avoiding the paths of men.” And the words, like all of Homer’s words, were precise to the point of cruelty, because that was exactly what Bellerophon did on the Aleian Plain: he consumed his own soul. Not in the dramatic, poetic way that the phrase suggests, not in a burst of flame or a howl of anguish, but slowly, quietly, the way a candle consumes itself, the wax melting, the wick shortening, the flame growing smaller and dimmer and more uncertain with each passing hour, each passing day, each passing season, until the light that remains is barely distinguishable from the darkness around it, and the distinction, for all practical purposes, has ceased to matter.</p>
<p>The Aleian Plain was the right place for this. It was, by any measure, a nowhere, a stretch of scrubland and dry grass that lay between the mountains and the sea in a part of Anatolia that the gods had apparently created on an off day, when their attention was elsewhere and their creative energies were at a low ebb. The soil was poor. The water was scarce. The vegetation was the kind that survived not by thriving but by refusing to die, the tough, leathery, endlessly patient plants that cling to dry earth and extract sustenance from rock and air and the occasional, grudging rain. It was a landscape of endurance, of bare survival, and it asked nothing of the people who crossed it except that they cross it quickly and go somewhere else, somewhere greener, somewhere more hospitable, somewhere that had not been designated by geography and climate and the indifference of the divine as a place for wandering and nothing else.</p>
<p>Bellerophon wandered. He had no choice in the matter; his legs, shattered in the fall, had healed (after a fashion; after the rough, imperfect fashion in which bones heal when there is no physician, no splint, no one to set them properly), but they had healed wrong, twisted, shortened, so that his gait was a lurching, uneven thing, a broken rhythm that turned every step into an effort and every hundred paces into a minor odyssey. His spine, compressed and shifted, held him in a permanent stoop, so that the man who had once sat tall on the back of a flying horse now shuffled along with his face pointed at the ground, seeing nothing but dust and stone and the dry, stubborn plants that were his only companions. And his eyes. Something had happened to his eyes, either in the fall itself (the impact could have done it, the shock traveling through the bones of his skull to the delicate structures behind his eyes) or in the days and weeks afterward, lying on the hillside in the sun, the brutal Anatolian sun that bleached everything it touched, that turned colors to whites and whites to nothing. His vision dimmed. Not all at once, not in a dramatic darkening that announced itself and demanded acknowledgment, but gradually, incrementally, the way the light fails at the end of a long day, so slowly that you do not notice it is happening until you reach for something and miss it, until you step on a stone that you should have seen, until the world around you has become a blur of shapes and shadows that you navigate not by sight but by memory and instinct and the particular, painful wisdom of the body that has learned to function without the sense it depended on.</p>
<p>He was, in short, a ruin. A ruin of a man, the way a crumbled temple is a ruin of a temple: the outline was still there, the suggestion of what it had once been, but the structure was gone, the function was gone, the purpose was gone, and what remained was just the materials, the raw, inert, purposeless materials of a thing that had been built for something and was now built for nothing.</p>
<div class="section-break">
✦   ✦   ✦
</div>
<p>He walked the plain for years. This was the part of the story that the poets did not tell, because it was not the kind of material that poets favored: no battles, no triumphs, no moments of brilliance or beauty or divine intervention. Just walking. Just the slow, painful, endless traversal of a landscape that had no destination, no landmark, no feature that distinguished one part of it from another, so that walking across it was not really walking toward something or away from something but just walking, the act of locomotion stripped of purpose, movement without meaning, the mechanical operation of legs and feet and the will to continue, which persisted long after the reason for continuing had disappeared.</p>
<p>He ate what the plain offered, which was little. He drank from the infrequent streams that trickled through the scrubland in the wet season and dried up in the summer, leaving only cracked beds of mud and stone. He slept in the open, on the ground, curled on his side (he could not lie on his back; the damaged spine would not allow it), with no shelter from the sun or the wind or the cold night air that settled over the plain after dark like a punishment for the day’s heat. He spoke to no one, because there was no one to speak to, and even if there had been, what would he have said? I was Bellerophon? I rode Pegasus? I killed the Chimera? The words would have sounded like madness, like the ravings of a broken man who had invented a glorious past to compensate for a wretched present, and the worst part was that Bellerophon himself was beginning to wonder whether that was exactly what they were, whether the memories of the sky and the horse and the golden bridle were real or invented, whether the man who had flown was a different person from the man who walked, and whether the difference, if it existed, mattered to anyone, including himself.</p>
<p>People passed him on the road. Not often (the Aleian Plain was not a place that people went to on purpose), but occasionally, merchants on the trade routes that skirted the plain’s edges, soldiers moving between garrisons, families migrating from one hardship to another. They saw him: a crippled man, bent and limping, his hair matted, his clothes (what remained of them) filthy, his eyes unfocused, staring at nothing, or at everything, or at the same thing, which is the distance between what you were and what you are, a distance that cannot be measured in miles or years but only in the quality of the silence that fills it. They saw him and looked away, because looking at a man like that, a man who has been broken by something large enough to be visible in the wreckage, is uncomfortable in the way that looking at your own future is uncomfortable, and the impulse to look away is not cruelty but self-preservation, the instinct that says: do not stare at the thing that might happen to you, because staring gives it power, and power is what the broken man no longer has and what you are afraid of losing.</p>
<p>Nobody recognized him. How could they? The Bellerophon of the songs, the hero of the stories, was tall and straight and beautiful, a golden figure on a white horse, descending from the sky like a god, and this man, this wreck, this shuffling, limping, half-blind creature on the dusty plain, bore no resemblance to that figure, had no connection to that story, existed in a different category of being entirely. The hero of the songs was immortal (or near enough; songs outlive the men they celebrate, and the outliving is a kind of immortality). The man on the plain was mortal in the most brutally specific way: he was dying, slowly, from the inside, consuming his own soul the way a flame consumes a wick, and the flame was the memory of what he had been, and the wick was the reality of what he was, and when the flame reached the bottom of the wick, when the memory burned through the last of the reality, there would be nothing left, not even the smoke.</p>
<div class="section-break">
✦   ✦   ✦
</div>
<p>There were days when the memories came clearly. Days when the thin, bright air of the heights seemed to fill his lungs again, and the feel of Pegasus beneath him was so vivid, so present, that he could have sworn the horse was there, that the wings were beating, that the golden bridle was warm in his hands. On those days, the plain disappeared, and the sky opened above him (or inside him; the distinction had become unclear), and he was flying again, climbing again, reaching again for the brightness that had been right there, right there, right there at his fingertips, and the reaching was ecstasy, pure and terrible and addictive, the ecstasy of the almost-having that is worse than the never-having because it carries within it the memory of what almost was, and the memory is more vivid than any reality, more compelling than any present, more real than the dust and the heat and the broken legs and the dimming eyes.</p>
<p>On those days, Bellerophon walked faster. His legs hurt, his spine screamed, his eyes saw nothing but shapes and shadows, but he walked faster, as though the speed could carry him back, as though the plain were a runway and the walking were a takeoff and the sky, the beautiful, terrible, empty sky, were waiting to receive him again, to lift him up, to restore him to the height from which he had fallen. He walked faster and the horizon retreated before him, always the same distance away, always just out of reach, the way Olympus had been just out of reach, the way the brightness had been just out of reach, the way everything he had ever wanted had been just out of reach, and the reaching, the endless, futile, beautiful reaching, was all that was left of the man who had almost been a god.</p>
<p>On other days, the memories did not come. On those days, Bellerophon walked slowly, or did not walk at all, but sat in the dust and stared at the ground and tried to remember and could not, or tried not to remember and could not do that either, and the space between remembering and not-remembering was a kind of purgatory, a halfway place where the past and the present blurred into each other and neither one was solid enough to stand on, and the man in the purgatory was not Bellerophon (Bellerophon was a name from a story, a name that belonged to a man on a horse, a name that had no application to a cripple in the dust) and was not anyone else, because there was no one else to be, because the man who had been Bellerophon had consumed everything in becoming Bellerophon and had left nothing in reserve, no fallback identity, no alternative self, no ground-level version of himself that could function independently of the sky-level version, and the sky-level version was gone, was forever gone, was circling Olympus on a horse that no longer carried a rider, and what remained on the ground was not a self but an absence, not a person but a gap, not a man but the place where a man had been before the man went up and did not come down, or came down in a form so diminished that it barely qualified as a coming down, barely qualified as a continuation, barely qualified as anything at all.</p>
<div class="section-break">
✦   ✦   ✦
</div>
<p>The seasons turned. The plain, which seemed from a distance to be changeless, had its own rhythms, its own cycles, its own slow, patient calendar of greening and browning, of rain and drought, of growth and dormancy. In the spring, a thin flush of green appeared on the scrubland, the tough grasses sending up new shoots, the wildflowers blooming in brief, improbable patches of color that lasted a week and then disappeared, as though the plain had briefly dreamed of being beautiful and then woken up and remembered that it was not. In the summer, the heat baked the ground to a hardness that rang under Bellerophon’s feet like pottery, and the air shimmered above the plain in waves that looked like water but were not, the mirages that the desert makes to mock the thirsty, the images of what you want appearing in the place where what you want does not exist. In the autumn, the wind came, the dry, cold wind from the north that stripped the last leaves from the scrub and sent them tumbling across the plain like messages from a language no one spoke. In the winter, the rain fell, grudgingly, as though the sky resented having to provide even this small sustenance to a place so undeserving of its attention.</p>
<p>Bellerophon survived all of it. This was the perverse joke, the cosmic irony, the punchline to a story that was not funny: the man who had tried to become immortal was instead becoming something worse than immortal, something more enduring than immortal, because immortality at least implies a self that persists, a consciousness that continues, an “I” that goes on being an “I” forever, and what Bellerophon was becoming was not a persistent self but a persistent absence, a gap that walked, a nothing that endured, a man-shaped hole in the world that the world flowed around and did not fill.</p>
<p>Once, a merchant passed him on the road, a man with a donkey loaded with amphorae of olive oil, heading west toward the coast, and the merchant looked at Bellerophon and saw a cripple and felt the reflexive pity that the able-bodied feel for the broken, the pity that is half compassion and half relief that the brokenness belongs to someone else, and the merchant said, in the way of merchants who have been on the road too long and will talk to anyone, even cripples, even nobodies, even the shattered remnants of heroes wandering plains that nobody cares about: “Hard road, friend. Where are you headed?” And Bellerophon opened his mouth to answer and found that he had no answer, because “where” implies a destination and a destination implies a purpose and a purpose implies a self that has the purpose, and Bellerophon had none of these things, had lost them all somewhere between the brightness at the top of the sky and the thorns at the bottom of the fall, and what came out of his mouth was not a word but a sound, a broken, formless sound that might have been a laugh or a sob or the ghost of a language he used to speak, and the merchant, hearing it, looked away quickly, the way people look away from madness, from ruin, from the visible evidence that the world can take a man apart and leave the pieces walking, and the merchant hurried on, and Bellerophon stood in the road and watched the donkey’s hindquarters recede into the distance and felt, for the first time in many days, something that was almost an emotion, almost a connection to the human world he had left behind, and the almost-ness of it was worse than the nothing, because the almost-ness reminded him that the nothing was not natural, was not inevitable, was the result of choices he had made, heights he had sought, reaches he had attempted, and the reminder was a kind of cruelty that no god needed to inflict because the world itself inflicted it, daily, hourly, in every encounter with the people who were still whole, still purposeful, still walking toward somewhere with the quiet confidence of beings who knew their place in the world and accepted it.</p>
<p>He could not say “I was Bellerophon” because Bellerophon was the man in the sky and this man was on the ground and the two could not be the same person. The logic was simple, childlike, devastating: the sky man flew. The ground man walked. The sky man had a horse. The ground man had nothing. The sky man was beautiful, powerful, divine. The ground man was broken, weak, mortal. The sky man was Bellerophon. Therefore the ground man was not Bellerophon. Therefore the ground man was nobody. And the being of nobody, which might seem like a liberation (nobody has no obligations, no responsibilities, no past to live up to and no future to dread), was in fact the deepest imprisonment, because a nobody cannot escape from being nobody the way a somebody can escape from being a particular somebody; a nobody is trapped in the absence itself, locked in the void, imprisoned by the nothing, and the nothing goes on and on and on, undifferentiated, unrelieved, unmerciful, and the going on is the punishment that no god inflicted because no god needed to, because the punishment was inherent in the crime, was built into it, was the inevitable consequence of reaching for divinity and missing, the way a burn is the inevitable consequence of reaching into a fire.</p>
<div class="section-break">
✦   ✦   ✦
</div>
<p>He died on the Aleian Plain, though when exactly he died and how exactly the dying happened is not recorded in any song or story that has survived, because the dying of a nobody is not the kind of event that generates songs or stories. He died, and the dying was quiet, and the plain received his body the way the plain received everything: with indifference, with patience, with the vast, impersonal generosity of a landscape that does not judge, that does not distinguish between the bones of a hero and the bones of a goat, that treats all remains with the same slow, gentle, relentless process of dissolution and return, and the return is the only kind of immortality that the ground offers, the immortality of material, of substance, of the atoms and molecules that were once a man and are now dust and will be, eventually, something else, something that has no memory of what it was before, and the having no memory is not cruelty but kindness, because memory, for Bellerophon, had become a form of torture, and the end of memory was the end of torture, and the end of torture was, at last, at last, at last, peace.</p>
<p>Meanwhile, somewhere above, Pegasus carried Zeus’s thunderbolts across the sky. The horse had been received on Olympus with the honors due to a divine creature returning home: a stall in the stables of heaven, a place at the table of the gods (metaphorically; horses do not sit at tables, even divine ones), a role in the cosmic order that was both practical and symbolic, the bearer of lightning, the carrier of divine will, the winged figure that appeared in the sky before storms and was seen by mortals as an omen of power and change. The horse was immortal. The horse was a constellation, set among the stars by Zeus himself, the great square of the body and the trailing lines of the legs visible on clear nights, a permanent fixture of the heavens, a story written in starlight that would outlast every human civilization, every language, every memory.</p>
<p>The horse became eternal. The rider became nothing. And the gap between them, the gap that had once been bridged by a golden bridle and a bond of trust and the shared experience of flight, was now infinite, unbridgeable, permanent, the gap between the sky and the ground, between the divine and the mortal, between the story that survives and the truth that does not.</p>
<div class="section-break">
✦   ✦   ✦
</div>
<p>There is a hillside in Lycia, not far from the city where Bellerophon once ruled, where the shepherds take their flocks in the summer, when the lower pastures are brown and dry and the grass on the hills is still green enough to be worth the climb. It is a quiet place, a place where the wind moves through the grass with a sound like breathing, and the sheep graze with the placid contentment of animals that have never questioned their place in the world, and the shepherd sits on a rock and watches them and watches the sky and thinks the long, slow, unhurried thoughts that shepherds think, which are not the thoughts of kings or heroes or men who ride flying horses but are, perhaps, for that very reason, more durable, more sustainable, more capable of surviving the test of time without cracking under the weight of their own ambition.</p>
<p>It is evening. The sun is going down behind the mountains to the west, and the sky is turning the colors that the sky turns at the end of every day, the oranges and pinks and purples that are so beautiful and so familiar that most people have stopped seeing them, the way you stop seeing the face of someone you love because you see it every day and the every day robs it of its strangeness and its strangeness is what made you look in the first place. But the shepherd sees the colors, because the shepherd has nothing else to look at and nowhere else to be, and the having nothing else and nowhere else is not poverty but richness, the richness of attention, the richness of presence, the richness of being exactly where you are and looking at exactly what is there.</p>
<p>The shepherd’s child sits beside him. The child is young, young enough to still find the world astonishing, young enough to still ask questions about everything, young enough to believe that every question has an answer and every answer is true. The child looks up at the sky, which is darkening now, the blue deepening toward black, and the stars are coming out, one by one, tentative at first, like children peeking around a doorway, and then in multitudes, in cascades, in the overwhelming profusion that the night sky offers to anyone who looks up and waits.</p>
<p>“What is that one?” the child asks, pointing at a group of stars that forms a shape in the darkness, a shape that might, if you squinted and used your imagination (and children have plenty of imagination; it is one of the few resources that the young possess in greater abundance than the old), be a horse. A horse with wings. A horse leaping across the sky with its mane streaming behind it and its great wings spread wide and its body caught in the eternal moment of flight, forever rising, never landing, the perfect image of freedom, of transcendence, of the thing that every earthbound creature looks up at and longs for.</p>
<p>“That is Pegasus,” the shepherd says. “The winged horse.”</p>
<p>“Who rode him?” the child asks, because children always ask about the rider; the horse is beautiful, but the horse is an animal, and animals, in the stories that matter to children, exist in relationship to the humans who ride them, tame them, befriend them, love them.</p>
<p>“A hero,” the shepherd says. “The greatest hero who ever lived. His name was Bellerophon. He tamed the winged horse and rode it across the sky, and he killed the Chimera, the terrible monster that breathed fire, and he defeated the armies of the Solymi and the Amazons, and there was nothing in the world that could stand against him, because he had the horse and the horse could fly and no one who can fly can be beaten by anyone who cannot.”</p>
<p>The child absorbs this with the grave attention that children give to important information, the information that shapes their understanding of the world, that tells them what is possible and what is not, what is real and what is imagined, what is worth wanting and what is not worth wanting. The child looks up at the constellation and sees, not stars, not points of light in the darkness, but a horse, a real horse, a horse with wings and a rider on its back, a hero, a man who flew.</p>
<p>“What happened to him?” the child asks. “What happened to the hero?”</p>
<p>The shepherd is quiet for a moment. The wind moves through the grass. The sheep are settling for the night, folding their legs beneath them, lowering their heads, preparing for the long, peaceful darkness that is the reward for a day of grazing and walking and being what they are, which is enough, which is always enough, for a sheep.</p>
<p>“He flew to heaven,” the shepherd says.</p>
<p>And the child nods, satisfied, because that is the right ending, the only possible ending, the ending that the story demands: the hero flies to heaven. The hero joins the gods. The hero becomes immortal, becomes a star, becomes a story that outlasts the body that lived it and the mind that suffered it and the soul that was consumed by it. The hero flies to heaven, and the flying is forever, and the forever is the point, and the point is the lie, and the lie is the story, and the story is what survives.</p>
<p>Because the truth, the other truth, the truth that Homer knew and compressed into six words because six words were all the truth could bear, the truth that the hero did not fly to heaven but fell from it, that the hero did not become immortal but became a cripple wandering a desolate plain, that the hero did not join the gods but was rejected by them and cast down to the earth and left to consume his own soul in the dust and the heat and the terrible, ordinary loneliness of a man who has been stripped of everything that made him extraordinary, this truth does not survive. This truth is not the version that the shepherds tell their children on the hillsides in the evenings when the stars come out and the sky is beautiful and the world seems full of possibility and wonder. This truth is too heavy for the air. This truth belongs to the ground, to the dust, to the Aleian Plain, to the place where Bellerophon’s bones lie scattered among the bones of goats and the roots of tough, surviving plants, indistinguishable, unremarkable, forgotten.</p>
<p>The beautiful version survives. The beautiful version is always a lie. The lie is always more kind than the truth. And kindness, in the end, is what stories are for. The world is full of truths that are too heavy to carry, too sharp to hold, too dark to look at directly, and stories are the way we wrap those truths in something soft enough to touch, something bright enough to see, something light enough to lift, so that we can pass them from hand to hand, from parent to child, from generation to generation, without being cut by them, without being crushed by them, without being pulled down into the darkness that the truths, unwrapped, would reveal.</p>
<p>Bellerophon fell. Bellerophon wandered. Bellerophon died alone on a plain that nobody remembers, in a body that nobody recognized, consuming a soul that nobody mourned. This is the truth.</p>
<p>Bellerophon flew to heaven. This is the story.</p>
<p>The child on the hillside looks up at the stars and sees the horse, the beautiful, winged, immortal horse, leaping across the sky in the eternal night, and believes the story, and the believing is a kind of flight, and the flight is a kind of freedom, and the freedom is real even if the story is not, because that is the paradox of stories, the impossible, infuriating, necessary paradox: the lie gives us something that the truth cannot, and the something is not false even though the lie is, and the not-falseness of it, the genuine, lived, experienced reality of a child looking up at the stars and feeling wonder and possibility and the belief that heroes fly to heaven, is the only kind of immortality that matters, the only kind that works, the only kind that survives.</p>
<p>The stars turn. The shepherd and the child go home. The hillside is quiet. The grass moves in the wind. The sheep sleep. And above them all, in the vast, indifferent, beautiful darkness, the constellation of Pegasus burns on, silent and eternal, carrying nothing, carrying no one, carrying only the light of its own ancient fire across the sky, forever and ever, world without end.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
